# regime

regime; **regimen**; **regiment**. Though historically overlapping—they all date from the 1300s and 1400s—these words have undergone useful differentiation.

The word *regimen*, dating from about 1400, has as its oldest sense "the regulation of personal conduct that influences one's health." By the 1600s, the meaning had narrowed somewhat to denote "a specific diet, system of personal fitness, course of medication, etc." By the 1700s, the word had been broadened to denote any routine, program, or course of action. That is the usual sense today. In an archaic sense, *regimen* can also denote a ruling power or system of governance—but this usage is not recommended, given the strong predominance of *regime* for those applications.

*Regime*, originally \(in the late 1400s\) a variant of *regimen*, first bore an identical sense: "the regulation of personal conduct that influences one's health." Then, like its sibling, it came to mean "a specific diet, system of personal fitness, course of medication, etc." But by the late 1700s, it had taken on a distinct sense: either "a system of governance" or "a widespread or prevalent way of doing things." The word is now often a pejorative term denoting an authoritarian power that is not well regarded <Iranian regime> <Castro regime>. \(See **government \(b\)**.) Even so, it's still possible to use the term in its earlier senses <fitness regime> <dietary regime>. And technical writers use the term in reference to rainfall <the pluvial regime of South America> or other physical conditions <the darkness regime in Alaska> <the voltage regime in the building>. *Regime* is pronounced /ri-**zheem**/ \(AmE\) or /ray-**zheem**/ \(BrE and AmE\). Avoid /ri-**jeem**/ and /ray-**jeem**/.

In health-related contexts \(exercise, diet, etc.\), AmE speakers tend to use *regimen* while BrE speakers tend to use *regime*. Hence *exercise regimen* is the more common phrase in AmE, *exercise regime* in BrE. So the distinctions in meaning between the two terms are hardly firm and clean.

*Regiment*, denoting a group of people, is now best viewed as semantically distinct from the other terms. True, the word has an identical etymology with the others. In classical Latin of the second century AD, the word was merely a "poetic alternative to *regimen*" \(*OED*\). In Early Modern English, the word was commonly used in a sense akin to that now given to *regime* \(that is, "rule, government, royal authority"\). It could also refer to either a period of rule or a geographic area subject to rule. But all these senses have become obsolete or archaic. By the 1500s, the predominant uses had become associated with the military. *Regiment* came to denote the largest permanent unit of the British Army until 1881 and of the U.S. Army until about the time of World War II. When the official terminology shifted toward *battalions* and *companies* and *divisions*, the word *regiment* took on an informal sense \("a large body of troops commanded by a high-ranking officer"\). Meanwhile, it acquired an extended sense: "a large number of people organized as if in the military" <the regiments of editors formerly at copy desks of major newsmagazines>. This extended sense dates from 1575, as the *OED* records: "I could have brought a noble regiment of smugskinned nuns into my country soil."

To the extent that *regiment* is used today as if it were equivalent to *regimen*, we can properly regard that as a mistake. E.g., "No one wants to return to a strict *regiment* \[read *regimen*\] of dreary alphabet drills." Mike Berry, "Whole-Language Dives into Words," *Orlando Sentinel*, 9 Apr. 1995, at K1.

So the distinctions are pretty much complete. *Regime* denotes \(1\) a government, \(2\) a system for doing something by plan, or \(3\) in BrE, a special plan of exercise or diet. *Regimen*, especially in AmE, shares sense 3 of *regime*. *Regiment* denotes a large number of military troops or people behaving as if they were military troops.

