# Remote Relatives, Essay

Remote Relatives .

**A. Generally.** "Every relative word which is used shall instantly present its antecedent to the mind of the reader, without the least obscurity." Hugh Blair, *Lectures on Rhetoric* 65 \(Grenville Kleiser ed., 1911\). Surprisingly few modern grammarians discuss what has become an increasingly common problem: the separation of the relative pronoun \(*that*, *which*, *who*\) from its antecedent. For example, in the sentence "The files sitting in the office that I was talking about yesterday are in disarray," the word *that*—technically—modifies *office*, not *files*. But many writers today would intend to have it modify *files*. They would loosely employ a "remote relative."

The best practice is simply to ensure that the relative pronoun immediately follows the noun it modifies. As the following examples illustrate, lapses involving *which* are extremely common:

 - "There is a story told in the *Shabbat* about the famous Jewish scholar Rabbi Hillel *which* has some pertinence to the text before you." Neil Postman & Charles Weingartner, *Linguistics: A Revolution in Teaching* ix \(1966\). \(*Which* modifies *story*—12 words and 4 nouns before. A possible revision: *A story told in the* Shabbat *about the famous Jewish scholar Rabbi Hillel has some pertinence to the text before you*. Or: *There is a story told in the* Shabbat *about the famous Jewish scholar Rabbi Hillel—a story that has some pertinence to the text before you*.\)

 - "Legislators are constantly making decisions about law reform *which* depend on moral values." Simon Lee, *Law and Morals* 3 \(1986\). \(*Which* modifies *decisions*—4 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *Legislators are constantly making decisions about law reform, and many of these decisions depend on moral values.*\)

 - "This will take the game back to its roots in the 1920s, when we had the Decatur Staleys, owned by Staley's starch company, *which* later became the Chicago Bears." John Rothchild, "Rooting for the Federal Expresses," *Time*, 30 May 1994, at 53. \(*Which* modifies *Decatur Staleys*—6 words and 2 nouns before. The Chicago Bears started out as Staley's starch company? Fascinating. Actually, the problem is the parenthetical phrase *owned by Staley's starch company*. A possible revision: *This will take the game back to its roots in the 1920s, when we had the Decatur Staleys, owned by Staley's starch company. That team later became the Chicago Bears*.\)

 - "I looked at the dead body of my mother, *which* Astel was just in the process of covering with a sheet." Peter David, *Sir Apropos of Nothing* 127 \(2001\). \(*Which* modifies *body*, 4 words and 2 nouns before. A possessive phrase—*my mother's dead body*—would have prevented the problem.\)

 - "These facts, plus recent research conducted in the scrublands of Florida, *which* showed that a sand-swimming lizard species local to the area had far fewer skin parasites than other lizards present, led to the idea that swimming around in abrasive sand might help lizards scrub unwanted bugs from their exteriors." "Children of Dunes," *Economist*, 5 Oct. 2019, at 73. \(*Which* modifies *research*—7 words and 3 nouns before. A possible revision: *These facts, plus recent research showing that a sand-swimming lizard species in Florida's scrublands had far fewer skin parasites than other lizards present, led to the idea that swimming around in abrasive sand might help lizards scrub unwanted bugs from their exteriors.*\)

But the relative pronoun *that* is almost as troublesome, and when used remotely is even more likely to cause confusion—e.g.:

 - "There is a word unrecognizable even to some crossword puzzle addicts *that* is useful in describing my strategy of survival between May and October. I estivate." Leslie Hanscom, "Some Don't," *Newsday* \(N.Y.\), 21 May 1989, Mag. §, at 9. \(*That* modifies *word*—8 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *A word unrecognizable even to some crossword-puzzle addicts describes my strategy of survival between May and October. I estivate.*\)

 - "Justice Blackmun's tone was urgent, as if in the twilight of his career he wanted to reopen a dialogue on the death penalty *that* had all but disappeared from the Court with the retirement of Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall, who both believed that the death penalty was inherently unconstitutional." Linda Greenhouse, "Death Penalty Is Renounced by Blackmun," *N.Y. Times*, 23 Feb. 1994, at A1, A10. \(*That* modifies *dialogue*—5 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *Justice Blackmun's tone was urgent, as if in the twilight of his career he wanted to reopen a dialogue on the death penalty. That dialogue had all but disappeared from the Court with the retirement of Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall, who both believed that the death penalty was inherently unconstitutional*.\)

 - "The Census Bureau has a remedy for the next scheduled head count, in 2000. It is called sampling, a method similar to that used in public opinion polls *that* extrapolates the characteristics of a large group by talking to a representative part of it." Steven A. Holmes, "2 Communities, Poles Apart, Illustrate Debate on Census," *N.Y. Times*, 30 Aug. 1997, at 1. \(*That* modifies *method*—9 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *The Census Bureau has a remedy for the next scheduled head count, in* *2000**. It is called sampling, a method similar to that used in public-opinion polls. It extrapolates the characteristics of a large group from a representative sample*.\)

 - "C-130 aircraft packed with radio transmitters flew lazy circles over the Persian Gulf broadcasting messages in Arabic to the Iraqi people *that* were monitored by reporters near the border." Patrick E. Tyler, "War Imminent as Hussein Rejects Ultimatum," *N.Y. Times*, 19 Mar. 2003, at A1. \(*That* modifies *messages*—7 words and 3 nouns before. Probably the best edit would be to make a second sentence: *The messages were monitored by reporters near the border*.\)

Even *who* and *whose* are used remotely, and just as confusingly \(especially if more than one person has been mentioned nearby\)—e.g.:

 - "Patricia Buthmann and Tim Tyroler on Tuesday lost their effort to block being evicted from the Casa Carranza apartments . . . because they allowed a woman to stay with them *who* possessed two syringes suspected to be drug paraphernalia." Kris Mayes, "Renters Run Afoul of Eviction Law," *Phoenix Gaz.*, 29 Sept. 1994, at B1. \(At first, the relative pronoun *who* may seem to modify *them* as part of an archaic construction; in fact, it modifies *woman*—5 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *Patricia Buthmann and Tim Tyroler on Tuesday lost their effort to block being evicted from the Casa Carranza apartments . . . because a woman who had stayed with them was found to possess two syringes that appeared to be drug paraphernalia.*\)

 - "She is the mother of four children *who* at age 15 aborted what would have been her first child, and evidently she seeks to redress that wrong." William F. Buckley, "Both Sides Gearing Up on Abortion," *Fresno Bee*, 26 Jan. 1995, at B9. \(Who aborted whom? It reads as if the woman's 15-year-old quadruplets aborted what would have been her first child—a time-warp problem. *Who* is intended to modify *mother*—4 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *The mother of four children, she at age 15 aborted what would have been her first child, and evidently she seeks to redress that wrong.*\)

 - "Just last year, they succeeded in removing a Victorian house near the Capitol Building, *whose* owner had refused every entreaty to leave for half a century." Peter S. Canellos, "The Second Battle of Concord," *Boston Globe* \(Mag.\), 29 Sept. 1996, at 14. \(*Whose* refers to *house*—5 words before—but seems at first to refer to *Capitol Building*. A possible revision: *Just last year, they succeeded in removing a Victorian house near the Capitol Building; its owner had refused every entreaty to leave for half a century.*\)

 - "Clearly ‘Cruyff' mustn't be confused with that autocrat Dutchman with a similar name *who* used to manage Ajax and Barcelona." "Let's Have a Bit of a Blow for Battling," *Daily Telegraph*, 2 Apr. 1997, at 44. \(*Who* refers to *Dutchman*—5 words and 2 nouns before. A possible revision: *Clearly, "Cruyff" mustn't be confused with the similarly named autocratic Dutchman who used to manage Ajax and Barcelona.*\)

At times, the remote relative may even appear in a phrase such as *in which*—e.g.: "The unexpected announcement renewed speculation about the 74-year-old Pope's broader state of health, particularly because he planned an important speech at the United Nations on the family *in which* he was expected to discuss the Vatican's views of the recent population conference in Cairo." Alan Crowell, "Pope, Citing His Health, Cancels His Planned Trip to New York," *N.Y. Times*, 23 Sept. 1994, at A1. \(*In which* modifies *speech*—8 words and 3 nouns before. A possible revision: *The unexpected announcement renewed speculation about the 74-year-old Pope's broader state of health, particularly because he planned an important speech at the United Nations on the family. In that speech, he was expected to discuss the Vatican's views of the recent population conference in Cairo.*\)

As in many of the examples quoted above, remote relatives often seem to result from the writer's ill-advised combining of two sentences into one. Among the advantages of avoiding remote relatives—preventing miscues and even ambiguity—is an improved average sentence length.

For more on relative pronouns, see **that \(a\)**. For a similar problem with prepositional phrases, see illogic \(e\).

**B. The Exceptional *which*.** Some exceptionally well-edited publications, including *The New Yorker* and *The Atlantic Monthly*, adhere to the *that*–*which* rule but nonetheless use *which* instead of *that* to signal that the relative clause is separated from its antecedent. E.g.: "Before joining the Bush Administration, he \[Richard Haass\] had held the job at the Brookings Institution *which* James Steinberg now holds." Nicholas Lemann, "How It Came to War," *New Yorker*, 31 Mar. 2003, at 36, 39. \(A possible revision: *Before joining the Bush Administration, he had held a job at the Brookings Institution—the job now held by James Steinberg.* Or: *Before joining the Bush Administration, he had held the job that James Steinberg now holds at the Brookings Institution.*\)

The estimable Barbara Wallraff, formerly senior editor at *The Atlantic Monthly*, defends the exceptional *which*: "When another noun intervenes between the noun being modified by the restrictive clause and the clause itself, and that second noun might be misread as the antecedent, we use *which* without a comma to signal the connection to the first noun." *Word Court* 116 \(2000\). For example, to mitigate the remote relative *a book about movies that I enjoyed* \(where it is the book and not the movies that were enjoyed\), the exceptional *which* would make it *a book about movies which I enjoyed*. While the device might be more effective if it were widely understood and used, it can't clear up the ambiguity in this example. And it is further hampered by the still-widespread use of *which* in restrictive clauses. As long as that practice continues, *which* can never be a reliable signal because the reader can't be sure whether the clause is restrictive or nonrestrictive. The far better approach will always be to keep the antecedent and relative clause side by side.

