# enhance

enhance (= to heighten, intensify, or improve) should refer to a quality or condition, not to people. So while you can enhance people's education or experience or even salaries, you can't really enhance people themselves. But some writers fall into error—e.g.: "If all workers do what they are supposed to do together, . . . everyone will be *enhanced from* \[read *improved by*\] working together." Sheila Storm, "Knowlton Focuses on Details," *Successful Bus.*, 27 Sept. 1993, at 1.

Similarly, because *enhance* has long had positive connotations, it is a mistake to use it in reference to something bad, such as injuries—e.g.: "Papiano says that the intubation *enhanced* \[read *aggravated*\] the injury." William Nack, "From Fame to Shame," *Sports Illustrated*, 19 Apr. 1993, at 70. Unfortunately, lawyers have developed what they call the *enhanced-injury doctrine*, which allows an injury victim to seek damages from a deep-pocket company even if the company didn't directly cause the injury; under that rule, a person seriously injured by a drunk driver in a car crash could sue not only the driver but also the car manufacturer for not making the victim's car safe enough for such a crash. The use of *enhance*, though not a good choice, is understandable: to a plaintiff's lawyer who stands to gain a percentage of any recovery, an injury can be "enhanced" if the potential damages are greater. By this logic, though, an excruciating death would be the most "enhanced" situation. This is pure torture to the English language.

