# Ergative Verbs, Essay

Ergative Verbs. In the mid-20th century, grammarians devised the term *ergative* ("working") to describe a verb that can be used (1) in the active voice with a normal subject (actor) and object (the thing acted on) \<I broke the window\>; (2) in the passive voice, with the recipient of the verb's action as the subject of the sentence (and most often the actor's becoming the object of a *by*-phrase \<the window was broken by me\>; or (3) in what one textbook called "the third way," as an intransitive verb (without a direct object) \<the window broke\>. Ergative verbs are also sometimes called *labile verbs* or *ambitransitive verbs*.

These verbs show remarkable versatility. For example, you might say that *he is running the machine* or *the machine is running*, *she spun the top* or *the top spun*, *the crew decided to split the rail* or *the rail splits at that point*. But not all verbs can be ergative: you couldn't, for instance, change *I cleaned the window* to *\*The window cleaned*. And verbs that are ergative with some nouns are not ergative with others, so you couldn't change *I broke a bad habit* into *\*A bad habit broke*.

Ergative verbs tend to communicate a change of state \<Geller bent the spoon\> \<the spoon bent\>, and we may think of that change as "working." The change may also be a change of position instead of a change of state \<spin the bottle\> \<the bottle spins\>, or it may be a change of movement \<may I drive your car?\> \<your car drives nicely\>. It may also be a change brought about by cooking \<steam the rice\> \<the rice is steaming\>, an activity that seems conducive to ergative verbs.

Because the intransitive uses of an ergative verb eliminate the actor altogether, sentences that use it suggest some action that takes place spontaneously. Why? It may be because of a rule \<hunting season starts in November\> or a natural process \<when the leaves drop\> that makes the actor irrelevant. It may be a device to hide the actor \<the rumor spread quickly throughout the office\> or even to create mystery \<the door slammed shut behind them\>.

Sometimes writers ill-advisedly give transitive verbs intransitive uses as if the verbs were conventionally ergative—e.g.: "Even the Infamous Could Redeem Were Jesus Here, Book Says," *Austin Am.-Statesman*, 30 July 1994, at A20. This headline writer showed enough sophistication to use the subjunctive *were* (for a condition contrary to fact) but confused the passive *to be redeemed* with the active *to redeem*. Then again, we should recognize the imperative for succinctness in a headline. See headlinese.

Likewise, in standard english the verb *pique* is transitive only—hence possibly passive—but the writer of the following sentence tried to make it ergative (perhaps to avoid the passive voice): "Anderson was impressed with Weiskopf's attitude. And when others also called to sing the praises of Loch Lomond, Anderson's interest *piqued* \[read *was piqued*\]." Bill Huffman, "Course of ‘Compelling' Beauty," *Ariz. Republic*, 29 Sept. 1994, at D6. (This misuse of *pique* might also result from confusion with *peak*. See **pique**.)

Newly ergative verbs take some getting used to, so new coinages are likely to sound as jarring as nouns suddenly made into verbs (see functional shift). They can give prose a voguish, trendy tone \<that jacket wears nicely on you\> or else a tone of commercialese \<the books shipped yesterday\> or airlinese \<sorry, your flight canceled\>.

