# Esq

Esq., in AmE, typically signifies that the person whose name it follows is a lawyer. The mild honorific is used nowadays with the names of men and women alike; it is incorrect, however, if it appears with any other title, such as *Mr.* or *Ms.* In BrE, *esquire* is used of any man thought to have the status of a gentleman.

One law review has devoted several pages to an article on whether women attorneys should use *esquire*. Richard B. Eaton, "An Historical View of the Term *Esquire* as Used by Modern Women Attorneys," 80 *W. Va. L. Rev.* 209 (1978). As to the title and purpose of that article, however, it is worth noting that "*Esq.* is . . . not used on oneself, e.g. neither on a card (which bears *Mr*.) nor on a stamped-and-addressed envelope enclosed for a reply." Alan S.C. Ross, "U and Non-U: An Essay in Sociological Linguistics," in *Noblesse Oblige* (Nancy Mitford ed., 1956). But somehow, the idea has gotten out that *Esq.* is something you put after your own name—e.g.: "These \[lawyers\] assembled here are not ordinary litigators. Instead of appending a mere ‘Esq.' after their names, they are ‘Factl'—Fellows of the American College of Trial Lawyers." David Margolick, "At the Bar," *N.Y. Times*, 10 Mar. 1989, at 23. In fact, it is quite non-U for a lawyer to put *Esq.* on cards, stationery, and self-addressed envelopes. See class distinctions.

The real question, therefore, is not whether women should append *Esq.* to their own names but whether others should append it to women attorneys' names. The answer: if you're going to use *Esq.* with attorneys' names, do it for both sexes. If precisionists are bothered by this practice, they should pretend that *Esq.*, when used after a woman's name, stands for *esquiress* (recorded in the *OED* from 1596). See sexism (d).

