# wicked

wicked, adj. & adv. In standard english, this word is an adjective meaning (1) "predisposed to wrongdoing; morally bad" <wicked witch>; (2) "emanating from someone who is predisposed to wrongdoing or morally bad" <wicked words>; (3) "\[more generally\] bad, horrid, or beastly" <a wicked snake hissing at us>; (4) "\[of air, water, etc.\] foul, pernicious, offensive" <a wicked smell>; (5) "\[jocularly\] naughty, malicious, or sly; ill-behaved in an amusing way" <"you wicked boy," he said, smiling>. Sense 5 is a casualism typically found in speech. In slang, the adjective has an additional sense: (6) "\[even more jocularly\] very good" <that's a wicked motorcycle>.

In the dialect of New England, the word is characteristically used as an adverbial intensifier in a sense similar to *very*, *terribly*, or *awfully* <the exam was wicked hard> <you're wicked late>. Interestingly, this adverbial usage can be traced from Middle English (1100–1499) consistently into Early Modern English (1500–1699) and Modern English (since 1700). The *OED* cites a 1663 instance in which the playwright Thomas Porter wrote *Yesterday was a wicked hot day*. So this usage has a long history. How did it come to be a regionalism in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and surrounding states? Although some have suggested an association with Salem's 17th-century witch trials, that speculation is unlikely. (etymology is a field that, once outside the hands of experts, is rife with spurious conjectures.) A more likely explanation is that the usage is a survival from early English settlers—a regionalism that persisted for a few centuries before suddenly bursting into popularity in the late 1990s. Indeed, in the 2000s the usage began spreading beyond New England into AmE speech more generally—though still with strong New England associations. For the time being, it has become wicked trendy. See vogue terms.

As for New Englanders who wish to keep their speech peculiarly regional, they use such phrases as *wicked pissah* (lit., "wicked pisser") to mean "outstanding" or "excellent" <the Red Sox game was wicked pissah>. Formerly, it was primarily used in a derogatory sense <that loss was a wicked pissah> (often as a two-word exclamation when something goes wrong), but today it's often used ironically in a laudatory sense. Whatever the meaning, this slang is unlikely to become Standard English anytime in the next few centuries. Now *that's* the very essence of what it is to be wicked pissah.

