# fey

fey, adj.; **fay**, n. *Fey* derives from the Old English *fæge* \("doomed to die"\) and carries the related sense "in an unusually excited state \(like one about to die\)." By an old slipshod extension, the word came to mean "whimsical, otherworldly, enchanting, eccentric," perhaps from confusion with *fay* \(see below\). This shift in meaning occurred by the mid-20th century: "Construed to mean ‘elfin' by most literate people, \[*fey*\] is defined as ‘fated to die'; its popular meaning has only recently crept into a single dictionary. Confronted with this lag, editors say that the citation slips have not yet shown sufficient evidence to justify the new sense." Felicia Lamport, "Dictionaries: Our Language Right or Wrong" \(1950\), in *Words, Words, Words About Dictionaries* 64, 65 \(Jack C. Gray ed., 1963\). Today the word's original meaning is all but forgotten. E.g.: "An upsurge of book sales in cyberspace could have dramatic effects on the fortunes of the already *fey* and contradictory world of book publishing." "Even Before Books," *Wash. Post*, 4 Aug. 1997, at A18.

*Fay* \(= a fairy or elf\) is always a noun—e.g.: "And a key mythological figure is Melusina, a *fay* from an ancient fairy tale who is half-woman, half-serpent." Norman Weinstein, Book Rev., *Parabola*, 22 Sept. 1995, at 116. One writer mistakenly says that *fay* is an adjective meaning "elfin" or "elflike." See Kenneth G. Wilson, *The Columbia Guide to Standard American English* 193 \(1993\). See **elfin**.

Adding to the confusion is the name of King Arthur's nemesis, Morgan Le Fey. Originally, *fey* referred to the fact that Morgan brought Arthur's doom by bearing him a son predestined to destroy his father. But as the legend changed and was embellished with time, Morgan became less human and more magical. Today her name is alternatively spelled *Fey* and *Fay*, and she is almost always portrayed as a sorceress: more a fairy than a human.

