# -friendly, Essay

-friendly. When used in a compound with another word, *-friendly* implies ease of use or openness to the needs of a type of user. Several such compounds have become vogue terms on their own, beginning with *user-friendly*. That term usually describes a device, software, or website that is easy to use—e.g.: "I use online resources nearly exclusively for researching your complaints and keeping up to date on consumer issues. . . . None of these sites requires a fee, and most of them are pretty *user-friendly*." Suzanne Palmer, "Consumers' Protection Is Information," *St. Petersburg Times* (Fla.), 4 Feb. 2007, at E3. Many other analogous terms also exist, such as *customer-friendly*, *driver-friendly*, and *pet-friendly*.

These compounds are best hyphenated, since the construction puts a spin on the usual sense of *friendly*. The hyphen is occasionally omitted in such compounds—e.g.: "The future of newspapers is the Internet . . . . But the present is still in print. And part of the strategy is to make the print version more *reader friendly* \[read *reader-friendly*\]." Mike Littwin, "Where's Littwin? Way Back Here on News 38," *Rocky Mountain News* (Denver), 23 Jan. 2007, News §, at 38.

In all these terms, *-friendly* means that the thing being discussed is good, effective, and easy to do for the user, customer, driver, pedestrian, or reader. But one recent marketing term turns that sense on its head—e.g.: " ‘I think \[the school cafeteria\] is also going to introduce more *allergen-friendly* choices. More and more kids, it seems, have peanut or milk allergies.' " Linda Bock, "School System Faces Gluten Allergies Head-On," *Telegram & Gaz.* (Worcester), 1 June 2006, at B1 (quoting Diane O. Mercier, a parent). Here, the meaning is not that the food is "friendly" or beneficial to allergens, but that it is friendly to those who have bad reactions to them. It contains no allergens. The twist may itself cause some readers to suffer an unpleasant gastrointestinal episode.

