# Fused Participles, Essay

Fused Participles .

**A. In General.** Should you say *I appreciate your coming* or *I appreciate you coming*? That's the question. Literary folks tend to want *your*; everybody else tends to want *you*.

Subordinate clauses with the verb in the -*ing* form sometimes have the subject in the possessive case (as in *My going home made her sad*, or *Shareholders worried about the company's reorganizing*) and sometimes don't (as in *Me going home made her sad*, or *Shareholders worried about the company reorganizing*). H.W. Fowler in 1926 suggested that the latter, without a possessive, was "rapidly corrupting modern English style" (*FMEU1* at 206). He thought that a participle (functioning as a gerund) lacked a proper grammatical relationship to any preceding noun or pronoun that was not in the possessive; it was instead "fused" with it in some sense, so he gave this construction the name "fused participle," and the name has stuck.

No reputable grammarian today doubts that Fowler overstated his case in calling fused participles without exception "indefensible." Scholars such as Otto Jespersen and George Curme cited many historical examples and illustrated the absolute necessity of the nonpossessive subjects of participles in some sentences, barring a complete rewrite. For example, in *The chance of that ever happening is slight*, no one would write *\*that's ever happening* (the demonstratives *this* and *that* never take the possessive suffix).

That's not the only kind of sentence in which the possessive is impossible or uncomfortable. While preparing this entry, I put out a Twitter poll for this sentence: *I detest the inconvenience caused by my* \[*car/car's*\] *being with the mechanic.* With some 841 votes, the preference was for *car* (80%) over *car's* (20%). Some readers proffered similar sentences, such as *I think my nightmares were caused by my dog* \[not *dog's*\] *spending the night at the animal hospital*—preferring the nonpossessive form.

Yet Fowler had a stylistic if not a grammatical point. Especially in formal prose, traditionalists are likely to prefer the possessive whenever it is not unidiomatic or unnatural. In the following sentences, then, possessives might have been better used than the nouns and objective-case pronouns:

 - "If his patients asked, he would not object to *them trying* \[read *their trying*\] it." Elisabeth Tacey, "Doctor Puts Faith in Shark Cancer Cure," *South China Morning Post*, 21 Apr. 1994, at 3.

 - "The pattern of our life, which now involves *me spending* \[read *my spending*\] some days each week totally alone so as to write, proves to be creative and necessary for all of us." Terry Waite, "A Long, Long Way to Travel," *Times* (London), 27 Aug. 1994, at 15.

 - "Now when 11-year-old Shelby Young rides the bus to Loudon Grade School, he doesn't worry *about the older kids soaking* \[read *that the older kids will soak*\] him with water guns." Carrie Sturrock, "Separate Buses, Better than Equal," *Concord Monitor*, 7 Sept. 1994, at B1. (The difference in meaning between *kids soaking* and *kids' soaking* is slight: as currently worded, *the older kids soaking him* seems elliptical for *the older kids who are soaking him* \[in which case the original sentence is right\]. But the writer probably meant *their soaking him*—hence *the older kids' soaking him*. The question is what he's not worrying about: the *kids* or the *soaking*. The revised version, with a new subordinate clause \[*that the older kids will soak him*\], is a good way to avoid the problem altogether.)

 - "Ms. Warren promises to run a government ‘more actively managing our currency, value to promote exports and domestic manufacturing' in response to other countries\['\] manipulating their exchange rates." "Warrensworld," *Economist*, 26 Oct. 2019, at 18, 20.

 - "This implosion comes despite the United States\['\] having poured more than $83 billion in weapons, equipment, and training into the country's security forces over two decades." Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Fahim Abed & Sharif Hassan, "Over 15 Cities Slip Out of Grasp of Afghan Forces," *N.Y. Times*, 14 Aug. 2021, at A1.

Fowler assumed a distinction between the "gerund" -*ing* form (which behaves like a noun) and the "present participle" -*ing* form (which behaves like a verb). It feels more literary, to be sure, to say *My undertaking this job depends on your paying a deposit first*—as opposed to \**Me undertaking this job depends on you paying a deposit first*.

But some believe the gerund/participle distinction to be illusory. After all, whatever label we may attach to -*ing* words, they have the identical form for every English verb. Some grammars today, such as *CGEL*, assume a single -*ing* form called the "gerund-participle." A modern rule using that term might be formulated this way: when a subordinate clause has its verb in the gerund-participle form, the subject should generally be in the possessive case, especially in formal contexts; using the objective case, however, is acceptable in informal writing.

The so-called gerund-participle has many uses. Fowler used a hopelessly outmoded example, contrasting *women's having the vote* (= the fact that women are eligible to vote) with *women having the vote* (= women who are eligible to vote). Fowler seemed to think that the fused participle arose because people confused the two meanings. Whether or not that is so, here we are concerned only with the former construction, the clauses that basically express facts. The other constructions using the -*ing* form are irrelevant. (*I heard Jenny coming in last night*, for example, has *Jenny* as direct object; it means "I heard Jenny last night, as she came in," and putting the possessive case on *Jenny* would be a mistake.)

In the relevant constructions, using a possessive isn't obligatory—and is sometimes even inappropriate. For example, there's typically no choice involved when you're using nonpersonal nouns \<he was responsible for the luggage having been lost\>, nonpersonal pronouns \<she couldn't accept nothing being done about the problem\>, and noun phrases ending in pronouns, as in *some of them* \<he regretted some of them being left out in the rain\>. For a scholarly discussion of still other exceptions, see Thomas Nunnally, "The Possessive with Gerunds," 66 *Am. Speech* 359, 363–65 (1991).

In modern print sources, fused participles are more likely to be encountered in BrE than in AmE. In one short piece in a leading English newspaper, for example, these two examples appeared:

 - "Within minutes of a terrorist \[probably read, in AmE, *terrorist's*\] driving a white van at speed along the central pavement, social media platforms were broadcasting the uncensored horror that he left in his wake." "Low-Tech Terror in the Age of Social Media," *Times* (London), 18 Aug. 2017, at 5.

 - "There is no prospect of the threat \[probably read, in AmE, *threat's*\] abating." *Ibid*.

The lack of apostrophe is more understandable when another possessive is nearby—e.g.: "Her latest obsession . . . is similar to a normal sheet mask except that it's made from rubber to prevent the mask's ingredients evaporating." Amy Kester, "Is £10 Treatment Worth It?," *Daily Mail* (U.K.), 16 Aug. 2017, at 3. In AmE, the fused participle (*ingredients evaporating*) in that example would be forestalled by inserting the word *from* before *evaporating*. See **prevent**.

Trigger warning: the following ratios aren't altogether comforting to traditionalists.

## Language-Change Index

Garden-variety fused participle \<I can understand him not wanting to participate\>: Stage 3
 - Current ratio in print (*resent their being* vs. *resent them being* in World Englishes): 1.5:1
 - Current ratio in print (*appreciate you coming* vs. *appreciate your coming* in AmE): 2:1
 - Current ratio in print (*appreciate you coming* vs. *appreciate your coming* in BrE): 3:1
 - Current ratio in print (*appreciate you coming* vs. *appreciate your coming* in World Englishes): 3:1

**B. A Brief History.** Rather cryptically, H.W. Fowler wrote in 1926 that the phrase *fused participle* had been "invented a dozen years \[before\] for the purpose of labelling & so making recognizable & avoidable a usage considered by the inventor to be rapidly corrupting English style." (*FMEU1* at 206.) Who was this inventor? Either H.W. himself or his late brother, F.G. Fowler, who died in 1918 from tuberculosis contracted in World War I. The term was first used, it is believed, in *The King's English* (2d ed. 1908). In that book, the two brothers elaborated why they thought the fused participle "defrauds" both the gerund and the "honest participle." (*Ibid.* at 120.) The argument extends for ten pages.

About the time that *FMEU1* appeared in 1926, a skirmish arose over the subject between Fowler and the great Danish linguist Otto Jespersen, who marshaled voluminous historical evidence to undermine Fowler's near-absolute position (see Jespersen, "Disputed Points in English Grammar," 2 *S.P.E. Tracts* \[2 Dec. 1926\], at 811–36). It was an aggressive 25-page article with repeated slights of Fowler. Because Fowler had termed the fused participle "grammatically indefensible," Jespersen called him an "instinctive grammatical moralizer" who had "emotional objections." (*Ibid.* at 812, 835.) In answer to Jespersen, Fowler bristled: "He . . . laughs at me." (Fowler, "On -*Ing*: Professor Jespersen and ‘the Instinctive Grammatical Moraliser,' " 2 *S.P.E. Tracts* \[24 Mar. 1927\], at 856.) Fowler said the two men "do not look at problems of idiom and expression from the same point of view." (*Ibid.*) And he embraced the sobriquet "instinctive grammatical moralizer," saying: "the ability to distinguish between the right and wrong in speech does seem to me much more a matter of instinct than of history." (*Ibid.* at 857.) Ruffled by the exchange, Fowler largely withdrew as a contributor to the Society for Pure English, which had published the contentious articles. (See Jenny McMorris, *The Warden of English: The Life of H.W. Fowler* 168 \[2001\].)

Most commentators have agreed that Jespersen won the debate as Fowler stubbornly clung to an untenable position. In the end, Fowler opposed the fused participle because he thought it "ugly."

Fowler's final word in the debate came in 1931, when Oxford University Press issued the third edition of *The King's English*. He kept the relevant passages much as they had been in 1908: "How is it conceivable," Fowler asked, "that people should leave out the possessive *'s* in the reckless way they do?" (*The King's English* 127 \[3d ed. 1931\].) His answer was that it was "the combined result of a mistake and an inconvenience." (*Ibid.*)

He had a good illustration: *I dislike my best friend('s) violating my privacy*. "It cannot be a true account of the matter," he wrote, "to say that *friend* is the object of *I dislike*." (*Ibid.* at 124–25.) Few would quarrel with the example as showing the benefits of the possessive before the gerund-participle, as Fowler knew: "Many of us would be willing to adopt the sentiment conveyed who yet would not admit for a moment that they disliked their best friend even when he intruded; they condemn the sin, but not the sinner." (*Ibid.* at 125.)

For all the examples in which the fused participle might be thought a necessity, Fowler suggested that they were "monstrosities" that needed an "entire recasting." (*Ibid.* at 133.) "The reader will perhaps agree," he wrote, "that the long gerund subject—or rather noun phrase of the fused participle—is a monstrosity, the abolition of which would be a relief to him, and good discipline for the writer." (*Ibid.*)

Rather than ignore the well-known scuffling with Jespersen, Fowler acknowledged it in a new footnote: "The present (1930) re-setting of the text gives me the opportunity of affirming again my belief in this tendency \[the need to avoid fused participles\], in spite of the formidable criticism directed against its reality by Professor Jespersen. That criticism and my comments upon it appeared in numbers xxv, xxvi, of the *S.P.E. Tracts*, the reading of which I venture to recommend to anyone seriously concerned over the fate of the Fused Participle.—H.W.F." (*Ibid.* at 128 n.)

Now back to the 2021 Twitter poll: *I detest the inconvenience caused by my* \[*car/car's*\] *being with the mechanic.* The 80% who voted for *car* would undoubtedly side with Jespersen; the 20% who voted for *car's* would side with Fowler. Perhaps it all comes down to tribalism. But if we're to be divided on the question, let us be respectful of the opposition.

Some will insist on prosecuting Fowler for his dogged insistence in the face of historical evidence to the contrary. How could his commitment to the point have been so irrationally intense? Let me posit a possibility. Fowler was a deeply rational man. The main characteristics of his life were "his quiet, unpretentious stoicism and his moral and intellectual integrity." (G.G. Coulton, *Dictionary of National Biography* *1931–1941* 292 \[1949\].) In 1926, he referred vaguely to "the inventor" of the phrase *fused participle*. Was this in reference to himself? Perhaps. More than once Fowler acknowledged that he appeared "to regard himself as nameless" and dwelled "from time to time on the joys of anonymity." (Fowler, *If Wishes Were Horses* 7 \[1929\].)

But it seems more likely that he was defending his beloved brother Francis, who had died too young in 1918—his coauthor of *The King's English*. He might have known that the phrase *fused participle* was among Frank's few legacies to grammatical literature. After all, *FMEU1* was dedicated to Francis, who, in Henry's words, "had a nimbler wit, a better sense of proportion, and a more open mind than his twelve-year-older partner." (*FMEU1* at iii.) That he was shielding his brother is pure conjecture, but it explains Henry's unshakable attachment the idea. And if the conjecture is true, Fowler's refusal to soften his position did indeed perpetuate Francis's legacy—and all of us can surely forgive the pertinacity with which Henry defended it.

