# margarita

margarita; **margherita**; **margarite**; **marguerite**. *Margarita* /mahr-gә-**ree**-tә/, a Spanish loanword dating in English from the early 1950s, denotes a cocktail made with tequila, triple sec, and lemon or lime juice. Although the term is known to derive from the Spanish name for *Margaret*, the precise origin of the term is unknown—many conflicting accounts having been posited. *Margherita* /mahr-gә-**ree**-tә/, an Italian loanword dating in English from the 1950s, denotes a type of Neapolitan pizza made with tomatoes, mozzarella, basil, salt, and olive oil. The pizza is thought to have been named for Margherita of Savoy \(1851–1926\), the queen consort of Italy from 1878 to 1900. Yet not until the 1990s was this type of pizza commonly referred to in English-language print sources. At first it was commonly written *Margherita Pizza* \(two capital letters\) or *Margherita pizza* \(just one\). But since 2006 it has predominantly been treated as a generic term \(hence lowercase\): *margherita pizza*. *Margarite* /**mahr**-gә-rīt/, a French/German loanword, denotes either \(1\) a pearl, or \(2\) a pearly silicate or crystalline rock. The word was borrowed twice: first \(sense 1\) from French in the 1300s and much later \(sense 2\) from German in the early 1800s. A *marguerite* \(a French loan dating in English from the 1600s\) is a daisy, a daisy-like flower, or a type of cultivated chrysanthemum. Relatedly, the name *Marguerite*, the French version of *Margaret*, has had *Daisy* as a corresponding nickname since the 1800s.

