# Missouri

Missouri. The pronunciation of this state name has provoked much strife. Although most Americans say /mi-**zʊr**-ee/, many Missourians say /mi-**zʊr**-ә/. In and around St. Louis, many say /ee/, but /ә/ has traditionally predominated in other parts of the state. Both pronunciations are standard. Yet it is a telling point that politicians running for statewide office are careful to say /ә/—to seem folksy and avoid sounding like an auslander. \(Cf. **Nevada**.\) But interestingly, the final-syllable /ә/ pronunciation seems to be for insiders only—all non-Missourians being expected to say /ee/.

The information in the preceding paragraph is the result of my frequent travel during two decades through different parts of the state, in the course of which I have routinely quizzed locals and polled lawyer-audiences in seminars that I've taught—including all 180\+ lawyers in the state attorney general's office and all the state appellate judges. The results, strongly favoring /mi-**zʊr**-ә/ for native Missourians outside St. Louis, are essentially the same as those in Allen Walker Read's study, "The Pronunciation of the Word ‘Missouri,' " 8 *Am. Speech* 22–36 \(Winter 1933\). But for a very different view, insisting that /mi-**zʊr**-ee/ is preferred throughout the state, see Charles Harrington Elster, *BBBM* at 319–22.

An early commentator, the noted linguist E.H. Sturtevant, attributed the final-syllable /-ә/ to hypercorrection. It's a surprising but quite plausible argument: "In the dialect of Missouri and the neighboring states, final *a* in such words as ‘America,' ‘Arizona,' ‘Nevada,' becomes *y*—‘Americy,' ‘Arizony,' ‘Nevady.' All educated people in that region carefully correct this vulgarism out of their speech; and many of them carry the correction too far and say ‘Missoura,' ‘praira,' etc." E.H. Sturtevant, *Linguistic Change* 79 \(1917\).

