# gender

gender.

**A. Generally.** The term *gender* has long been used as a grammatical distinction of a word according to the sex assigned \(usually arbitrarily in the Romance languages\) to a given noun. It has newly been established in the language of the law in phrases such as *gender discrimination*, a use disapproved as jargonistic by some authorities. In reformers' eyes, it eliminates the distracting word *sex* \(which, of course, denotes coitus as well as physical characteristics that contribute to one's sense of self\).

In recent years, *sex* in one of its senses has narrowed its meaning to designate a set of biological characteristics <sex change>, while *gender* increasingly denotes the social and psychological distinctions between men and women <gender roles>. For example, most academics today would use *gender* in place of *sex* in the following sentence: "Given strong patriarchal traditions here, it is hardly surprising that the criticism is often put in ways that emphasize the two leaders' *sex*, even if Bangladesh has had plenty of reason in 22 years of nationhood scarred by military coups and assassinations to conclude that men in power are no less likely than women to be governed by the whims of personality and ambition." John F. Burns, "Two Women, at the Top and at Odds," *N.Y. Times*, 28 July 1994, at A7. As worded, the sentence might even contain a miscue for some readers; that is, you might expect the sentence to be completed differently—e.g.: "Given strong patriarchal traditions here, it is hardly surprising that the criticism is often put in ways that emphasize the two leaders' *sex*, which by all accounts is becoming more frequent."

There are, in short, legitimate reasons for preferring *gender* outside grammatical contexts. But polemicists sometimes argue that the reasons are entirely political—e.g.: "The \[‘gender equity'\] industry prefers the word ‘gender' to ‘sex' because ‘sex' suggests immutable differences, while ‘gender' suggests differences that are ‘socially constructed' and can be erased by sufficiently determined social engineers." George F. Will, "A Train Wreck Called Title IX," *Newsweek*, 27 May 2002, at 82.

Although the phrase *sex discrimination* has been predominant since the mid-20th century, the phrase *gender discrimination* caught on in the late 1980s and 1990s and now predominates. See **sex**.

Current ratio in print \(*gender discrimination* vs. *sex discrimination*\): 1.1:1

**B. *Both genders*; *either gender*; *opposite genders.*** Although these phrases have long been commonplace ways of supposedly denoting all people, they are no longer universally seen as all-encompassing. The view today among medical and psychological experts is that not all people fall into one of two categories. *Nonbinary* or *intersex* people are neither male nor female. Hence it is increasingly seen as insensitive, in some quarters, to use *both genders*, *either gender*, *opposite genders*, or similar phraseology that perpetuates the binary view of humanity. In 2020, the *AP Stylebook* began warning against them—although it did allow occasional uses of *boys and girls*, *males and females*, and *men and women*. It rightly notes that "language around *gender* is evolving." Controversies surrounding this and allied terminology show no sign of subsiding. See **they \(a\)**. Cf. **cisgender** & **transgender**.

