# general

general. The vogue lately has been to address attorneys general and solicitors general as if they were military officers, that is, simply as *General So-and-So*—e.g.: "May I ask, *General Starr*, in the survey, is this the only statute that has this particular 10-day notice requirement?" Oral Argument of *Michigan v. Lucas*, No. 90-149 (26 Mar. 1991). Despite its prevalence among some of the most esteemed members of the bar and judiciary, it is (strictly speaking) incorrect. In titles such as *attorney general*, the word *general* is not a noun, but a postpositive adjective—that is, an adjective that follows rather than precedes the noun it modifies, usually for a historical reason: it reflects Romance rather than Germanic (or English) syntax. Postpositive adjectives exist in English largely as a remnant of the Norman French influence during the Middle Ages—an influence most deeply felt in the language of law, politics, religion, and heraldry. *Attorney general* and *solicitor general* are but two examples of this phenomenon. Others include *court-martial* and *notary public*. No one, however, calls a notary public simply "public." And the *general* in *attorney general* is every bit as adjectival as it is in *general counsel*.

The practice of using *general* as a faux title appears to have been popularized by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, who was otherwise known as a stickler for grammar. He used the term in this way as early as 1980. Meanwhile, the Chief Justice in that era, Warren Burger, fastidiously addressed the Solicitor General as "Mr. Solicitor General." But from the outset of his own chiefship, Rehnquist used *general* as a title, undoubtedly helping to spread the linguistic innovation. The practice has continued with Chief Justice John Roberts and has been adopted by other members of the Court as well. Even transcript references to the Solicitor General now simply state "General Clement," "General Kneedler," and "General Kagan." Among the early commentators on this solecism was Michael Herz in "Washington, Patton, Schwarzkopf, and Ashcroft?," 19 *Const. Comment.* 663 (2002).

Sticklers will abstain. Others will blithely persist. And the militarization of high legal offices marches forward.

