# Needless Variants, Essay

Needless Variants, two or more forms of the same word without nuance or differentiation—and seemingly without even hope for either—teem in the English language. They're especially common in the outer reaches of the language—in technical vocabulary. Unfortunately, the unnecessary use of variant forms (e.g., adjectives ending in *-tive* and *-tory*) leads not to precision in technical writing but to uncertainties about the writer's intention. The trusting reader silently thinks, "The writer used *investigative* on the previous page but now uses *investigatory*—is a distinction intended?"

"It is a source not of strength," wrote H.W. Fowler, "but of weakness, that there should be two names for the same thing \[by-forms differing merely in suffix or in some such minor point\], because the reasonable assumption is that two words mean two things, and confusion results when they do not" (*FMEU1* at 373). The confusion is perhaps greatest when the writer who is fond of inelegant variation discovers the boundless mutations of form that exist in unabridged dictionaries: *submission* will appear in one sentence, *\*submittal* in the next; *quantify* on one page, *\*quantitate* on the next; and so on.

"On the other hand," Fowler advises us, "it may be much too hastily assumed that two words do mean the same thing; they may, for instance, denote the same object without meaning the same thing if they imply that the aspect from which it is regarded is different, or are appropriate in different mouths, or differ in rhythmic value or in some other matter that may escape a cursory examination" (*FMEU1* at 373). Hence the nonlawyer should not jump to assume that *necessaries* is uncalled for in place of *necessities*; that *acquittance* has no place alongside *acquittal*; that *recusancy* is yet another needless variant of *recusal*; that *burglarize* is as good for a British audience as it is for an American one; and so forth.

Any number of entries throughout this work attempt to ferret out and discriminate between cognate words with established or emerging distinctions and those that seem, at present, to have neither. To the extent possible, words and phrases rightly classifiable as needless variants ought to be dropped from the language.

