# Noel

Noel; **Noël**; **Nowell**. The song "The First Noel" has been traced back to a book of English carols dated 1833, with the spelling *Nowell*. Although the song is known to have originated in rural western England, the composer is unknown. The song title was spelled *nowell* through most of the 1800s, and this spelling made perfect sense. According to the *OED*, *nowell* is "a word shouted or sung as an expression of joy, originally to commemorate the birth of Christ"; it dates, somewhat surprisingly, from the 1300s. Chaucer used it in "The Franklin's Tale": "And *nowel* crieth every lusty \[i.e., joyful\] man." The word fell into disuse in the 1500s.

Sometime after the song's early-19th-century debut, probably in the late 1800s or early 1900s, the spelling of the song title (together with verses) was "corrected" to *noel*, which is a French word meaning "a Christmas carol." To make it even more Frenchified, some writers gave it a diaeresis (*noël*). Although this word is recorded in the English language from 1811, the *OED* contains only three illustrative quotations.

Most American adults who came of age in the 20th century are familiar with the spelling "The First Noel" and with front-yard Christmas signs that spell out *Noel* (or *Noël*). Yet many hymnals, such as the Episcopal Hymnal, consistently used the original spelling. This one makes more historical sense for two reasons. First, the song is English, not French. Second, the traditional English meaning is more in line with what most people intend today: someone with a Christmas display that says "Noel" probably doesn't mean "a Christmas carol," but instead something like "Christ is born\!" Yet *noel* is the predominant form and will probably remain so, apart from a few stalwart hymnals and songbooks.

