# bawdy

bawdy, adj.; **bawdry**, n. These words might belong mostly to a more "proper" era than ours. Plays, songs, jokes, and films that are *bawdy* are unabashedly indecent, coarse, or risqué. The word normally implies a kind of sexual suggestiveness, perhaps through double entendres <a "clean" standup routine riddled with bawdy innuendos>. Hence Shakespeare uses bawdy puns in rather serious scenes. But *bawdy* would hardly be applied to an explicit pornographic film: the use of *bawdy* demands a larger context in which there is a sense of propriety—perhaps a moderately formal situation in which, in a sexual way, there has been a breach in what is considered good form.

*Bawdry*, the noun, is a much less common word. It denotes language that is humorously coarse, vulgar, or ribald /**rib**-әld/ <the frequent bawdry in the performance had the audience atwitter>. A good synonym for denoting lewd jocularity is *ribaldry* /**rib**-әl-dree/.

In 1947, the lexicographer Eric Partridge came out with his classic book *Shakespeare's Bawdy*, which might as easily have been "Shakespeare's Bawdry." But that title would doubtless have seemed even more arcane than the one he chose. As he said in the preface, "the apparently provocative title is merely a convenient abridgement \[E.P. used the BrE spelling\] of ‘Sexuality, Homosexuality, and Bawdiness in the Works of William Shakespeare' " (p. vii). And the title itself might be thought to contain arguably bawdy puns—"Shakespeare Is Bawdy" and perhaps even "Shakespeare's Body." But Partridge disclaimed those puns: in 1965, he wrote that "this title . . . does not pun on ‘Shakespeare is bawdy'; it was adopted as more euphonious than ‘Shakespeare's Bawdry.' " Partridge, *The Gentle Art of Lexicography* 73 (1965). If the rest of us see something indecent, coarse, and risqué in his title, how are we to be labeled?

