# chaste

chaste.

**A. And Gender.** *Chaste* (= untainted by unlawful sexual intercourse; virtuous; sexually continent) is a word that applies to males and females alike. E.g.: "As a young and *chaste* boy, Yava said, he would often be called on to help construct the sand painting, lending the power of his purity." Barbara Yost, "Navajos Seek Answer with Help of Old Ways," *Phoenix Gaz.*, 4 June 1993, at A2.

Unfortunately, however, a bias pervades the word's usual applications so that it stereotypically refers to females—e.g.: "The study found \[that\] the profoundly patriarchal view only ‘*chaste*' and ‘moral' women and girls can be raped is commonplace." "Sexual Violence Reports Surge in South Asia," *Independent*, 23 Apr. 2021, at 28.

**B. And *celibate*.** There is also some confusion about the sense of *chaste*, as opposed to *celibate*. A person who is *chaste* is innocent of unlawful sex—that is, does not engage in sex with anyone other than the person's spouse. So in both secular law and church law, a person who frequently has sex, but only with his or her spouse, is chaste. By contrast, a person who is *celibate* (in the word's original sense and still the only definition in the *OED*) abstains from marrying—and sex, too, but only as a consequence of the choice not to marry. The times have passed that meaning by, and today this traditional sense is obsolescent at best. Though it remains current with the vow of celibacy that Catholic priests take (i.e., a promise not to marry), it is almost universally understood, even in that context, to mean "abstaining from sex"—e.g.: "His case underscores the growing debate within the church over whether there is a place in the priesthood for gay men, even *celibate* ones." Sacha Pfeiffer, "Crisis in the Church," *Boston Globe*, 25 Nov. 2002, at A1. And while many word extensions result in the loss of a useful and unique term, here the shift in meaning of *celibate* has created a term that has no good substitute—especially since *chaste* sounds archaic, carries outdated connotations about sex, and has drifted toward becoming gender-specific. It would be difficult, for example, to replace *celibate* in the example above gracefully.

