# commonality

commonality; **commonness; commonalty; commonage; \*commonty**. The common character of these words may cause confusion. The ordinary words are *commonality* and *commonness*. Although historically the two have overlapped, they are best kept separate in accordance with the following definitions. *Commonness*, the general noun corresponding to *common*, may mean: (1) "the state or quality of being common" <the commonness of cable television>; (2) "the quality of being public or generally used" <the commonness of the thoroughfare>; (3) "the state of being run-of-the-mill" <the commonness of his writing>; or (4) "vulgarity" <the commonness of a sot>. *Commonality* = the possession of an attribute in common with another <stressing commonality rather than divisiveness>. E.g.: "Despite these differences in \[parliamentary privilege\], a global norm emerges from a *commonality.*" Nani Jansen Reventlow & Jonathan McCully, "The Protection of Political Expression," in *Regardless of Frontiers* 85 (Lee C. Bollinger & Agnès Callamard eds., 2021).

The remaining words are more easily distinguished. *Commonalty* = (1) commoners; the general body of the community (excluding nobility); (2) a municipal corporation (a sense to be avoided with this word because *corporation* is the ordinary term); or (3) a general group or body. In the following sentence, the writer may be using *commonalty* in sense 3—in which case it's a redundancy—or may have intended *commonality*: "The Alabama code stood as a statement of the rules of the game that a family of professionals . . . adhered to in recognition of their *commonalty* \[read *commonality*?\] and because it might, by forcing an affiliation, help keep them out of trouble." Jethro K. Lieberman, *Crisis at the Bar* 56 (1978). But *commonalty* probably displaces *commonality* as often as it does because it is a typo that spell-checkers can't catch and that proofreaders easily miss—e.g.: "The two candidates—incumbent Leon Young and challenger Walter Lanier—also say they want to create more programs tailored to the youths in the area, but that's where the *commonalties* \[read *commonalities* or, better, *similarities*\] between the two end." Felicia Thomas-Lynn, "Battling Democrats Agree on Profiling," *Milwaukee J. Sentinel*, 4 Sept. 2002, at B5.

*Commonage* = (1) the right to pasture animals on common land; (2) the condition of land held in common; or (3) an estate or property held in common. *\*Commonty*, in its existing uses, is a needless variant of *commonage*.

## Language-Change Index

 - *commonalty* misused for *commonality*: Stage 1

