# content, n

content, n. **A. And *contents*.** When referring to written matter or oral presentation, *content* /**kon**-tent/ refers to the ideas or thoughts contained \(in words\) as opposed to the method of presentation. Wilson Follett disapproved of the modern tendency to use *content* as well as *contents* for "what is contained" \(*MAU* at 107\), but the usage is old and is now common. It got a boost with the growth of the World Wide Web, being commonly used to refer to the material on websites. And the differentiation it represents—as explained below—is genuinely helpful.

Whereas *content* invariably refers to nonmaterial things, *contents* refers most commonly to material ingredients—e.g.: "Birthdays, holidays and special occasions, Forman is usually greeted with that flat skinny box that makes no secret of its *contents*." "Sticking Their Necks Out," *Times-Picayune* \(New Orleans\), 13 Aug. 1996, at F1. But sometimes it refers to nonmaterial ingredients, especially when the suggestion is that many items are being considered—e.g.: "Kirkland police improperly kept secret the *contents* of a crime report on Northeast District Judge Rosemary Bordlemay and were ordered by a court to release the document." Kevin Ebi, "City Loses Suit, Bid to Shield Jurist," *Seattle Times*, 29 Dec. 1995, at B1.

**B. And *contentment*.** In the sense "the fact or condition of being fully satisfied \(i.e., contented\)," the word *contentment* is now standard. *Content* is reserved for a single idiom: *to \(one's\) heart's content*. But as an adjective it is common—e.g.: "She was *content* with her arrangement." See **content**, adj.

