# crepe

crepe; **crape**. These words trace back to the same origin: the French word *crêpe*, a gallicism dating from the 1600s. Almost from the beginning, the anglicized spelling *crape* was used in many phrases to denote the thin, transparent, gauze-like fabric. The phrase *English crape* was considered the equivalent of *crêpe anglaise*; hence also *China crape* answers to *crêpe de chine*, etc. In Modern English, however, the two spellings have undergone a not altogether gossamer differentiation. A *crepe* \(/krep/ or /krayp/\) is either a thin French-style pancake or a type of fabric woven of twisted yarns that yield a matte finish and a soft hand. In the pancake sense, the word often appears with the circumflex: *crêpe*. \(See diacritical marks.\) But the usual style in English is to omit the circumflex. A *crape* /krayp/ is a band made of that fabric and worn around the arm as a sign of mourning. In short, *crape* has been significantly narrowed in its meaning.

What about the myrtle tree known technically as *Lagerstrœmia indica*? Is it *crape myrtle* or *crepe myrtle*? Both can be found abundantly in the literature. In books and newspapers, the two have long vied closely. Most dictionaries put the main listing under *crape myrtle*—and given that *myrtle* is a Middle English anglicization of OF *mirtille*, it seems more appropriate to have both terms anglicized. Hence *crape myrtle*. But neither spelling can be considered an error.

*Crape* is also a verb. To *crape* is to drape, shroud, or cover a piece of furniture with a length of the fabric associated with mourning.

