# Semantic Change

Semantic Change. The only constant in language, as in life, is change. That's an unsettling reality for many people, since language consists of stipulated meanings—rules agreed on by society at large. When some start ignoring or flouting those rules for what seems like no good reason, others will be confused and annoyed. That, too, is constant because almost all change brings some discomfort.

When it comes to word meanings, there are four major types of change: functional shift \(changing a word's usual part of speech\), narrowing the sense, broadening the sense, and overthrowing the traditional sense altogether.

**A. Functional Shift.** When Americans started using *contact* as a verb in the 1920s, a torrent of objections ensued. Soon after Theodore Dreiser used it in 1925, the *Spectator* editorialized: "Dreiser should not be allowed to corrupt his language" by using the word as a verb. A 1933 piece in *Harper's Magazine* called it an abomination, adding: "We trust it will still be considered so when the 2000th issue of *Harper's* is printed."

That hopeful prognostication came to naught. The verb proved useful in place of *get in touch with*. The replacements originally suggested—*consult with* and *meet*—just don't work when you want to say, "Contact me next week." The word is a "hypernym" \(a general umbrella term\) for a whole series of possible specifics \(*call*, *write*, *come by*, *send a telegram to*, and now *email* and *text* and even *Zoom*\). \(See **hypernym** \[p. 1215\].\) Today almost nobody even realizes that the term was once controversial. See **contact**.

The same can't be said of *impact* as a verb. The verb use was largely just implied by the adjectival form in the phrase *impacted wisdom teeth*. But then it came to be used synonymously with *affect* in the sense "to have an effect on." Traceable to the 1940s, this usage didn't become widespread until the 1970s. From that time until about 2010, it was widely disparaged by those keen on linguistic traditionalism. *How will this impact our planning?* Today one hears this kind of sentence several times an hour on TV news programs. It's ubiquitous and hence less objectionable as time goes by.

Why did the noun-to-verb shift take place? It provided a supposedly error-free way of denoting the idea, as opposed to *affect*. That is, people have long struggled with whether to use *effect* \(normally a noun, but also a verb meaning "to bring about"\) or *affect* \(usually meaning "to influence"\). \(See **affect**.\) So people started choosing *impact*, and the word spread quickly. Although some sticklers still object to this functional shift, *impact* seems destined to follow the course of *contact*, with any controversy soon forgotten \(except among snoots\). For a more extensive discussion, see functional shift. See also **impact** & **snoot**.

**B. Specialization.** Words often lose breadth over time. Instances in linguistic history are legion. *Meat* once meant food generally, not just the flesh of an animal to be eaten. *Disease* once meant discomfort of any kind. *Affection* once meant feeling of any kind. *Tyrant* meant simply king or absolute ruler. *Goods* denoted good things generally, and *doctrine* meant instruction. Specialization typically occurs so gradually that nobody minds if a genus term comes to denote just a species within that genus.

**C. Generalization.** The reverse process of broadening the meaning often causes anxiety. When a word is extended to cover things once excluded, people may feel that the rules of language are being violated.

The word *anxious* is a good example. It formerly corresponded closely to the noun *anxiety*; it meant "nervous, worried, fretful." As early as the 1500s, though, *anxious* was also being used only in reference to a certain kind of concern for something: it had come to mean "eager, keen." Over time, that sense may even have become predominant. Perhaps the only reason that some people still occasionally object to the *eager* sense is the doggedly different meaning of *anxiety*. See **anxious**.

Words once thought to be irretrievably narrow in meaning still elicit objections when they're used more broadly. *Enormity* \("monstrous wickedness" since the 1400s\), *fulsome* \("excessive to the point of being offensive" since the early 1600s\), and *reticent* \("reluctant to talk, taciturn" since the early 1800s\) are now often used neutrally in reference, respectively, to size, fullness, and disinclination. Sticklers object. As recently as the 2010s, the late John Simon, a language critic as well as a theater critic, was calling such things "illiteracies." See **enormity**, **fulsome** & **reticent**.

**D. Reversals in Meaning.** Nothing bothers the linguistic traditionalist more than the application of a word in a sense entirely different from its established one. Think of *disinterested* \(formerly just "impartial," but now often "bored"\), *fortuitous* \(formerly just "occurring by chance," but now often "fortunate"\), and *transpire* \(formerly "to come to light," but now usually a fancy equivalent of *happen* or *occur*\). These can still arouse moderate agitation. See **disinterested**, **fortuitous** & **transpire**.

If you really wanted to see fervent denunciations, you might have mentioned the phrase *begging the question* to the late Justice Antonin Scalia. He insisted, as unrelenting traditionalists still do, that the phrase denotes arguing in circles: insisting on the truth of the very thing in dispute \(as when somebody argues that everybody admires Jill because she's so popular\). It's the everyday equivalent of the phrase *petitio principii*.

But most people don't even know that use of *begging the question*. They think the phrase means "inviting the \(further\) question." In the 21st century, television commentators typically use the phrase exclusively in that sense. See **beg the question**.

It's enough to make you *nonplussed*. That's another word that is shifting its meaning diametrically. It has traditionally meant "baffled, flummoxed, mystified." But in recent years people have started equating it with its near-opposite, *unfazed*. See **nonplus**.

It might literally make you hit the ceiling. Well, not *literally*. Through hyperbole, people have been using *literally* as a mere intensifier of figurative exaggerations. So by overstatement, the word seems to take on the opposite of its actual meaning. Yet nobody would say, "It might make you figuratively hit the ceiling." You'd literally—quite literally—omit *figuratively*. See **literally**.

*Hopefully* in the sense "I hope" or "It is to be hoped" was the much-debated word in the 1970s. The traditional sense was "in a hopeful manner," as in "He looked hopefully into her eyes." In the 1930s a few people started using the word in the new manner, and by the 1960s it was attracting the negative attention of usage mavens—who disapproved. E.B. White first noticed the new *hopefully* in 1971, and soon it was so ubiquitous that he'd given up the fight. He wrote to a friend: "I regard the word ‘hopefully' as beyond recall. I'm afraid it's here to stay, like pollution and sex and death and taxes. . . . I heard the word first when I took a very pretty granddaughter of mine to dinner at Le Cheval Blanc. I asked her when she expected to move into her new apartment, and she replied, ‘Hopefully, on Tuesday.' I can't remember what I was stuffing into my mouth at the time, but I remember choking on it."

Although this new sense of *hopefully* began as an Americanism, it is now pervasive in BrE. *Hopefully* may well prove to be the most successful Americanism ever launched apart from *okay* \(dating from 1839\). See **hopefully**.

Few people get upset about *humbled* \(traditionally meaning "humiliated"\) being used, as it now is in almost every acceptance speech, to mean "honored." Award-winners typically say they feel "humbled" by whatever honor they've been given. Supposedly, they mean to say they feel inadequate to the honor. But listen closely and you'll find that most people who say they're feeling "humbled" are in fact quite chuffed. Many dictionaries haven't caught up with that one yet. See **humble**, vb.

By contrast, they've cursorily documented the reversal in the meaning of *peruse*. In the 1400s, the verb meant "to examine with care." By the 1500s, it meant, more specifically, "to read carefully" or "to pore over." That's how the literati still use the term.

But in recent decades, the word has come to be used in the near-opposite sense "to skim or read hastily." In the entry for the word in this very book, instances are cited from the 1990s and 2000s: *Thornton hurriedly perused the rule book* \(1997—while two baseball teams anxiously waited\) and *I very briefly peruse the authors* \(2010\). Those usages are not in keeping with the history of the word.

What does the *Oxford English Dictionary* \(*OED*\) say? Unfortunately, the big book \(available only online in the current third edition\) doesn't separate the "close reading" from the "perfunctory reading" senses. It uncharacteristically lumps them together. But then it also has an unusual usage note: "Modern dictionaries and usage guides, perhaps influenced by the word's earlier history, have sometimes claimed that the only ‘correct' usage is in reference to reading closely or thoroughly." It rejects the idea that *peruse* is narrower than the generic *read*: "*Peruse* has been a broad synonym for *read* since the 16th cent., encompassing both careful and cursory reading. . . . The implication of leisureliness, cursoriness, or haste is therefore not a recent development." But then the *OED* contradicts itself in the very next sentence: "The specific sense of browsing or skimming emerged relatively recently, generally in ironic or humorous inversion of the formal sense of thoroughness."

These clashing assertions, alas, are accompanied by no real evidence. How recently? We can't tell. Almost all the illustrative examples are consistent with close readings. Only Samuel Johnson's 1759 reference, about advertisements' being "very negligently perused," supports the note—and he was surely being ironic or humorous. Perhaps one isn't meant to peruse the entry in the traditional sense. See **peruse**.

Are there lessons here? Yes: \(1\) When you wonder about a linguistic innovation—especially if you're tempted to disapprove—it's well worth consulting a historical dictionary such as the *OED* to find out how old it really is. \(2\) Whenever you consult a dictionary, you shouldn't accept its word uncritically.

**E. The Recommended Mindset.** Must we simply accept all linguistic change on fatalistic grounds? Absolutely not. Though the language constantly shifts, you're entitled to grouse and harrumph at newfangled applications of words. Who knows? You might influence your friends and family, and you might help effect a widespread rejection of retrograde innovations. Exercise your democratic right to have your say. Just don't expect fulsome praise.

