# Phrasal Verbs

Phrasal Verbs are verbs that comprise more than one word, often a verb and a preposition \(acting as an adverbial particle\). Hence politicians *put up with* the press, and vice versa; striking workers *hold out* for more benefits; arguing family members *work out* their problems; campers must *make do* with the supplies they have; legacies are *handed down* from one generation to the next; gardeners work to *get rid of* weeds; overworked employees, like candles left too long, *burn out*; boxers are *knocked out*—and pregnant women \(in the vulgar dysphemism\) *knocked up*. For a collection of these verbs, see G.W. Davidson, *Chambers Pocket Guide to Phrasal Verbs* \(1982\).

Rhetoricians have taken two positions on these verbs. On the one hand, some recommend using them whenever they're natural-sounding because they lend a relaxed, confident tone—hence *get rid of* instead of the Latin-derived *eliminate*, *phase out* instead of *gradually discontinue*. On the other hand, because phrasal verbs often add to the number of words \(though not syllables\) in a phrase, some rhetoricians prefer avoiding them—hence *handle* instead of *deal with*, *resolve* instead of *work out*. In the end, this tension can't be worked out as a matter of general principle: one's judgment will depend on the context.

Four caveats are in order with phrasal verbs.

First, when using one, include the entire phrase and not just the primary verb. Don't say that two things *cancel each other* if what they're really doing is *canceling each other out* \(or *canceling out each other*\). And don't say that you're *drawing the resources* if you're *drawing on the resources*.

Second, don't use a phrasal verb if the adverbial particle is simply baggage that doesn't add to meaning. So don't say *meet up with* if *meet* suffices. Don't say *connect up* or *divide up* if *connect* or *divide* suffices. The same is true of other phrasal verbs, such as *calculate out* \(*calculate*\); *continue on* \(*continue*\); and *separate out* \(*separate*\). E.g.: "Competition in high schools . . . has not *slackened off* \[read *slackened*\]." Roger Buckley, *Japan Today* 93 \(2d ed. 1990\). It is true that differentiation has occurred with several phrases, such as *die off* \(*die*\), *face up to* \(*face*\), and *lose out* \(*lose*\). With these phrases, the particles add a nuance to the verb.

Third, although the corresponding nouns are often solid \(*breakdown*, *holdup*, *lockout*, *meltdown*, *phaseout*, *pushover*, *shutout*, *spinoff*, *workout*\), the verb forms should remain two words. Some writers, especially in BrE, tend to use hyphens that don't belong in the verbs—e.g.: "But Mr. Bush's speech suggests that the administration has overcome its initial doubts and is determined to *lock-in* \[read *lock in*\] still further nuclear weapons reductions." "Bush Ready for Further Nuclear Arms Cuts," *Fin. Times*, 28–29 Sept. 1991, at 1.

Fourth, because phrasal verbs are idioms that give the main verb a unique spin, don't compound the phrase's particle or preposition with another preposition—e.g.: "A2Z is incorporated in Idaho, a state where unclaimed-property laws do not specifically address gift cards, allowing Amazon.com to *hang onto* \[read *hang on to*\] unused value." Peter Lewis, "New Law Will Ban Gift-Card Expiration," *Seattle Times*, 27 June 2004, at B1. Here, *hang on* is the phrasal verb and *to* is the preposition that attaches to *unused value*. A similar problem crops up with phrases such as *give in* \[to\] and *brush up* \[on\]. See **give in to temptation**.

