# Preventive Grammar, Essay

Preventive Grammar. Occasionally a grammarian or editor will be asked a question such as, "Should it be *It's both of their second marriage* or *It's both of their second marriages?*" The expert to whom the question has been posed will demur and recommend a rewrite: *It's a second marriage for each of them*, or even *It's a second marriage for them both*. Or perhaps *the* for *a*. The questioner will persist: "But which of the original wordings is correct? Assume a rewrite is impossible."

But of course a rewrite is never impossible. Although questions of this kind might fascinate philologasters, they're a nuisance to both the true philologist and the true stylist. The best recourse is a rewording. Why perpetrate a sentence that's awkward but arguably defensible? A sentence that's only defensible will raise doubts in the reasonable reader's mind.

Often you'll be presented with a sentence that is correct, according to strict grammatical tradition, but that sounds either stuffy or downright wrong. During the 20th century, for example, some grammarians insisted that *Neither you nor I am a plumber* is correct phrasing. Using *are* or *is* in place of *am* would be quite incorrect. These grammarians relied on the "rule of proximity": in *neither–nor* constructions, the second element controls the verb for both number and person. Hence *neither you nor I am*. See, e.g., Roy Ivan Johnson et al., *English Patterns* 426 (1941) ("When two subjects are connected by the correlative conjunctions *either . . . or* or *neither . . . nor*, the verb agrees with the subject which stands nearer to it: . . . One thing is certain: either you or I *am* responsible."). See **neither . . . nor (a)**.

But this "correct" wording sounds awful. It sounds wrong. And now the empirical evidence shows that published authors have never used it much. In every period of Modern English, *\*neither you nor I are* has occurred more frequently than *\*neither you nor I am*. The grammarians who once insisted on *am* were simply out of touch with the practice of authors who actually used the phrase—and they were insisting on a kind of linguistic unreality. Their position was unsound.

The point of this entry is that you're better off avoiding awkward solutions entirely. If you're a smart writer, you won't create unnecessary frictions between you and your reader. It would be better to write or say, *You're not a plumber, and neither am I*. That would be seriously inconvenient only if you were trying to use *am a plumber* as a rhyme in a poem. In ordinary prose, it's typically to your advantage to write around a problem, thus eliminating doubts completely rather than creating merely defensible solutions to them. You want to convey a message, not defend the way you expressed it.

Many of the words discussed under skunked terms fall under this principle: if some number of readers, either those in the know or the linguistic know-nothings, are going to think you've gotten something wrong, your best course may be to reword. Even so, you must draw the line somewhere. If you mention "preventive grammar," and your interlocutor says it should surely be "preventative grammar," it would be understandable for you simply to write off your interlocutor altogether.

