# psychological moment

psychological moment entered the English language as the result of a misinterpretation. The phrase *das psychologische Moment* has been traced back to the 1870 German siege of Paris. A German magazine urged that the bombardment of the city be delayed until it would have the greatest psychological momentum (*das psychologische Moment*) to build on famine, disorder, and other effects of the siege and act as the final blow to crush French morale. A French translator misinterpreted *das Moment* ("momentum") as *der Moment* ("the moment"). The phrase was fashionably ridiculed in France, where it was rendered *moment psychologique* (= the moment in which the mind anticipates something that will happen).

The phrase was quickly picked up by English newspapers in a still more mistaken sense of "the psychologically appropriate moment." By 1926 it was overused to the point of becoming "hackneyed," according to H.W. Fowler's *Dictionary of Modern English Usage*. Today it is often used in reference to a psychological effect—e.g.: "Resources were measured, conserved and released at just the right *psychological moments*. Beethoven knew, and Delfs knows, that convincing emotional outburst paradoxically requires patience. Thus the extraordinary amount of ‘waiting music' in this symphony, long moments where the composer marks time between themes or between spike events in the score. The patient calm enlarged the fury of the storm." Tom Strini, "Concerto's Elements a Perfect Fit," *Milwaukee J. Sentinel*, 16 June 2001, at B6.

But the phrase is often used loosely to mean "the critical moment" or even "the nick of time," with reference to neither psychology nor the mind—e.g.: "Gately loves the complexity of the opera. ‘It's an opera director's delight. You can really direct it like a play. . . . The action never stops, or when it does, it's a deep *psychological moment* \[read *critical moment*\] that doesn't feel like the action has stopped.' " Catherine Reese Newton, "A Knight at the Opera: At Utah Opera, Verdi's Final Masterpiece, ‘Falstaff,' " *Salt Lake Trib.*, 27 Feb. 2000, at D1.

