# psychopath

psychopath; **sociopath**; **antisocial personality**; **antisocial**, n. The term *psychopath* is no longer common in clinical use among psychiatrists and psychologists because of the word's pejorative associations. The disparaging clipped form *psycho* undoubtedly contributed to the need for a shifting of vocabulary.

Instead, *sociopath* or *antisocial personality*—and the corresponding terms *sociopathy* /so-see-**op**-ә-thee/ and *antisocial personality disorder*—are now the generally accepted nomenclature among specialists. Not all sociopaths commit heinous crimes; indeed, many enter the professions and make a steady living (though not a good life). A sociopath is essentially someone who (1) is a pathological liar and misleader; (2) has a minimal investment in moral values; (3) has no conscience—i.e., feels no remorse for harm caused to others; (4) has little or no regard for others' rights, safety, and property; (5) is often angry or hostile; (6) exhibits callousness toward others' feelings; (7) tends to defend shortcomings or failures by going on the offensive against others; (8) tries to manipulate others' emotions; and (9) tends to act impulsively, without regard for the consequences. See *Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual* 601 (2006). One study, Martha Stout's *The Sociopath Next Door* (2005), reports that 4% of the population is afflicted with antisocial personality disorder—more men than women.

Often *antisocial personality* is shortened to *antisocial*—e.g.: "\[With\] the covetous *antisocial* . . . , aggrandizement, the desire to possess and dominate, is seen in a distilled form: These individuals feel that life has not given them ‘their due'; they have been deprived of their rightful amount of love, support, or material reward; and others have received more than their share." Theodore Millon et al., *Personality Disorders in Modern Life* 158 (2d ed. 2004).

Although *psychopath* and *sociopath* are generally thought to be interchangeable with *antisocial*, some writers suggest a distinction: "\[O\]ne often used distinction between *psychopath* and *sociopath* is the user's belief in the origins of the disorder. Psychopaths are believed to possess some constitutional disposition to the syndrome. In contrast, sociopaths are biologically normal, but develop antisocial characteristics through incompetent or hostile socialization, mainly defective parenting." *Ibid.* at 153.

