# intrusive

intrusive; **obtrusive**. As with the verbs *bring* and *take*, *come* and *go*, and *immigrate* and *emigrate*, some writers have trouble with the ins and outs of these adjectives. *Intrusive* means "butting in" or "prone to impose upon others against their wishes"—e.g.: "It's naggy and *intrusive*. Windows Vista is always popping up warnings and messages, making you wish you could just be left alone." David Pogue, "Hate Vista? You May Like the Fix," *N.Y. Times*, 22 Jan. 2009, at B1. *Obtrusive* means "jutting out"—e.g.: "But I like many of today's thinner TV stands because they are less *obtrusive* and come in a variety of styles." Mary Carol Garrity, "Flat-Screen TVs Offer Decorating Options," *Detroit News*, 17 Jan. 2009, at H10. But just as *bring* and *take* depend on the point of view, so do *intrusive* and *obtrusive*, to the point that the words do overlap. If you're being *intrusive*, thrusting yourself upon me against my wishes, I may find your *obtrusive* behavior rude. So are you being *intrusive* or *obtrusive*? Both, really. Or consider this example: "Part of the appeal of using a viral technique lies in the less *obtrusive* nature in which a user is confronted by it . . . ." James L. Johnston et al., "Widgets in Online Marketing Campaigns—A Balancing Act," *Metropolitan Corporate Counsel*, Jan. 2009, at 16. Either adjective might work there, though a good argument could be made that the more familiar *intrusive* fits better in this type of figurative context.

