# Hawaii

Hawaii.

**A. Sense.** To most people, the place name *Hawaii* is unambiguous. It refers to the 50th state of the U.S., comprising eight volcanic islands \(and more than 120 islets\), inhabited from the 5th century AD by Polynesians, annexed by the U.S. as a territory in 1900, and admitted as a state in 1959. The islands have individual names: Oahu, Maui, Kauai, Molokai, and so on. The biggest island, which is geologically the newest and still has active volcanoes, is called *Hawaii*. Hence an ambiguity: when you say *Hawaii*, do you mean all the islands collectively \(the 50th state\) or just the biggest of the islands? To cure this ambiguity, the big island is usually called *the Big Island* \(so capitalized\). But officially it is known as *Hawaii*.

In New York, of course, a similar problem exists: the major city and the state bear the same name. But here the semantic hegemony goes the other way \(from the smaller political unit to the larger\): if you say you're going to New York, everyone assumes it's New York City—no one thinks of Albany or Rochester or Buffalo. But if you say you're going to Hawaii, most people would think of Oahu or Maui—few would assume that you're referring to the Big Island.

**B. Spelled *Hawai‘i*.** Sometimes you'll see a diacritical mark \(called an *okina* \[/oh-**kee**-nә/\], *‘u‘ina* \[same pronunciation\], or *hamzah* \[/**ham**-zә/ or /**hahm**-zә/\] inserted in *Hawaii* and other Hawaiian names, usually between repeated vowels <Ni‘ihau> but occasionally between vowels not repeated <O‘ahu>. E.g.: "It looks like the rest of Hawai‘i." Andrew Doughty & Harriett Friedman, *Maui Revealed* 141 \(2001\). It is typically printed as an inverted comma, not as an apostrophe. This accent marks a glottal stop—a sharp guttural break that prevents a diphthong.

The okina is part of the Hawaiian language. It didn't crop up much in English-language contexts until the late 20th century. For example, the *Honolulu Advertiser* began using the okina on all its pages in October 2000, and today its front-page motto contains an odd-looking possessive: *Hawai‘i's Newspaper*. But usage isn't uniform: whereas the *Honolulu Advertiser* uses the okina throughout, names mentioned in the *Maui News* are free of it.

As a diacritical mark in an English context, the mark seems largely out of place and undesirable: \(1\) it smacks of a provincialism that resists linguistic assimilation to standard AmE; \(2\) it isn't much help to the nonnative speaker who seeks to pronounce Hawaiian names correctly \(look at *‘u‘ina* itself—most speakers would be at a loss to know how to say it\); \(3\) it leads to odd-looking phrases, such as the *Honolulu Advertiser*'s motto; and \(4\) most Hawaiian names \(such as *Hawaii* itself\) have been assimilated into English without the mark—usage has long been settled, and the okina simply unsettles it.

A University of Hawaii professor opposed the needless diacritical mark in English contexts as early as 1973: "The use of diacritics is not only superfluous but also contrary to the facts of conventional HE \[Hawaiian English\] orthography and normal HE pronunciation . . . . The practice must therefore be regarded as sheer pedantry or as sheer folly if it is to be interpreted as a pitch for the preservation of the glottal stop and the like in HE loans." Stanley M. Tsuzaki, "Hawaiian English," 48 *Am. Speech* 117, 119 \(1973\).

**C. Pronunciation.** Most Americans say /hә-**wī**-ee/ or /hә-**wah**-ee/—the only pronunciations recognized by most English-language dictionaries. Most locals say /hә-**vī**-ee/, since in the Hawaiian language a *w* preceded by a vowel is pronounced as a *v*. The /v/ sound is an "insider" pronunciation, used only by denizens of Hawaii. Among residents interviewed in August 2002, most agreed that it would be pretentious for anyone but a longtime resident to adopt the pronunciation. If one moved to the state, there might well be social pressures after some time to adopt the /v/ pronunciation. And the feeling among interviewees was that the pressures would be much weaker on the island of Oahu than on the other islands.

