# Hobson-Jobsonism

Hobson-Jobsonism. This term denotes the principle that with loanwords, foreign-sounding phonemes of the original language are modified to approximate the phonemes available in the borrowing language. Hence *Rodriguez*, pronounced in Spanish with two instances of the guttural *r*, is normally pronounced with the usual English *r* in English-speaking contexts—even when spoken by a Spanish speaker. An insistence that *Rodriguez* be enunciated just as it would be in Spanish—with the concomitant idea that an anglicized pronunciation is a "mispronunciation"—is perverse.

Most English speakers, for example, don't have trilled *r*'s or guttural *ch*'s—hence *terza rima* comes out /**tәrt**-zә **reem**-ә/ and *Bach* comes out /bahk/. To insist that Johann Sebastian's last name must have a guttural aspiration at the end is sheer pedantry: *Johann* can naturally be said /**yoh**-hahn/, but *Bach* cannot be said /bahkh/ without striking some listeners as a pretentious affectation. I once watched a European music critic spend 15 minutes trying to teach an accomplished American music professor how to say the name *Leos Janaček* authentically. In the end, /**lay**-ohs yah-**nah**-chek/ was as close as the available phonemes made it possible to come. Frustrated, the music critic ended up declaring his efforts unsuccessful. Cf. pronunciation \(d\).

The headword for this entry got its name from *Hobson-Jobson*, an 1886 glossary of South Asian terms collected during the British rule of India, each term having been roughly transcribed into approximate English pronunciations. The book was written by Sir Henry Yule and A.C. Burnell and updated in 1903. The title comes from an entry in the glossary denoting a ritual Muslim procession called *Ya Hasan*, *Ya Husain*. The authors' "transliteration" was widely considered pejorative.

In a multilingual, pluralistic world, everyone should know that those who don't speak a foreign language fluently will, when pronouncing a "borrowed" word or a foreigner's name, fail to enunciate precisely as a native speaker of the source language would. It makes no sense for English-speakers, visiting another continent, to take up precious minutes impatiently trying to teach people in some other country how to say their names just the way their families do. Likewise, it makes no sense for those from non-English-speaking countries to insist that their names aren't being pronounced properly by English speakers who are doing their level best with the phonemes they habitually use. People generally acquire all the phonemes in their native language or languages by the age of seven. After childhood, acquiring new phonemes can be difficult.

English has many thousands of loanwords, which are traditionally pronounced in an anglicized way. Words are assimilated to a borrowing language. That's inevitable and unobjectionable. It would be preposterous to hear English spoken with the etymologically "proper" pronunciations of all the source languages.

Names, of course, are particularly personal for people. Jeanne /**jee**-nee/ doesn't want to be called Jean /jeen/, and Caroline would rather not be called Carolyn. But that's usually a matter of forgetfulness on the speaker's part. It's quite different in the case of Hobson-Jobsonism. If Bryan goes to a distant land and hears his name pronounced /brī-**yʊn**/ or /bī-**yʊn**/ or /brīl/ by almost everyone he meets, he shouldn't bristle and try to "correct" people. He should instead appreciate the friendly people around him, enjoy the experience, and learn what he can of the culture. If he doesn't, this entry should be promptly called to his attention.

But there's another angle that we shouldn't forget. The preceding discussion assumes that the struggling speaker is genuinely trying. It can seem callous and patronizing for a teacher in an English-speaking country, without prompting from the foreign student, to say, "I can't possibly say your name," "I'll give you a nickname instead," "Let me give you the American version of your name," etc. A sincere effort goes a long way.

