# Abbreviations, Essay

Abbreviations.

**A. Acronyms and Initialisms.** Six points merit attention here.

First, be aware of the technical difference between the two types of abbreviated names. An *acronym* is made from the first letters or parts of a compound term. It's read or spoken as a single word, not letter by letter \(e.g., *awol* = absent without official leave, *radar* = radio detection and ranging, and *scuba* = self-contained underwater breathing apparatus\). An *initialism* is also made from the first letters or parts of a compound term, but it's sounded letter by letter, not as one word \(e.g., *r.p.m.* = revolutions per minute\).

Second, the question often arises whether to place a period after each letter in an acronym or initialism. Searching for consistency on this point is futile. The trend today is to omit the periods. Including them is the more conservative and traditional approach. Yet because an acronym is spoken as a single word \(e.g., *UNESCO*\), periods are meaningless. If an initialism is made up of lowercase letters, periods are often preferable: *rpm* looks odd as compared with *r.p.m.*, and *am* \(as opposed to *a.m.*\) looks like the verb. But with initialisms made of uppercase letters, the unpunctuated forms are likely to prevail \(as in *ABC*, *ATM*, *HIV*, *IRA*, *SUV*, *URL*, etc.\). After all, it makes sense to write an abbreviation in its most abbreviated form.

Third, the best practice is to give the reader some warning of an uncommon acronym or initialism by spelling out the words and enclosing the acronym in parentheses when the term is first used. A reference to *CARPE Rules* may confuse a reader who does not at first realize that three or four lines above this acronym the writer made reference to a Committee on Academic Rights, Privileges, and Ethics. On the other hand, well-known abbreviations don't need this kind of special treatment—there's no need to announce a "Parent Teacher Association \(PTA\) meeting."

Fourth, capitalization raises various questions. In AmE there was once a tendency to print initialisms in all capitals \(e.g., FMLA, NJDEP\) and acronyms in small capitals \(e.g., gaap, madd, nasa\). Today, however, the strong trend is to use all capitals for both kinds. But in BrE the tendency is to uppercase only the first letter, as with *Ifor* and *Isa* for *Implementation Force* and *individual savings account*. An influential British commentator once suggested \(with little success on his side of the Atlantic\) that the lowercasing be avoided: "From the full name to the simplified label three stages can be detected. For instance, the Society \[for Checking the Abuse of Public Advertising\] . . . becomes first *S.C.A.P.A.*, then *SCAPA*, and finally *Scapa*. In the interests of clarity this last stage might well be discouraged, since thereby the reference is made unnecessarily cryptic." Simeon Potter, *Our Language* 177 \(rev. ed. 1966\). American writers have generally agreed with this view.

Fifth, don't use abbreviations that have already been taken. Although it's understandable how a writer in 1959 might have used *PMS* for *primary message systems*, this would be worse than ill-advised today, since *premenstrual syndrome* is more commonly referred to by its initials than by its name. E.g.: "There are ten separate kinds of human activity which I have labeled Primary Message Systems \(PMS\). Only the first PMS involves language. All the other *PMS* \[read *PMSes*\] are nonlinguistic forms of the communication process." Edward T. Hall, *The Silent Language* 45 \(1959\). The language doesn't easily embrace dual-meaning acronyms. One exception is *IRA*, which has long referred to the Irish Republican Army but in the 1980s came to denote also an individual retirement account. Other examples exist, but all are generally to be avoided. Once everyone thinks of the *FAA* as the Federal Aviation Administration, it's unwise to use that initialism in reference to the Federal Arbitration Act.

Sixth, when an indefinite article is needed before an abbreviation, the choice between *a* and *an* depends simply on how the first syllable is sounded. A vowel sound takes *an*, a consonant sound *a*—hence *an MGM film*, *an SOS*, *a DVD player*, *a UFO*. See **a \(a\)**.

**B. Resulting Redundancies.** Some acronyms and initialisms often appear as part of a two-word phrase in which the second word is what one of the short form's letters stands for. So a bank customer withdraws cash from an *ATM machine*, using a *PIN number* as a password. A supermarket clerk searches a milk carton for its *UPC code*. High-school seniors study hard for the *SAT test* \(though the SAT owners now insist that the *T* does not stand for *test*—see **SAT**\). Economists monitor the *CPI Index*. American and Russian diplomats sit down to negotiate at the *SALT talks* as their military counterparts consider whether to launch *ABM missiles*. Websites may display pages in *PDF format*. And scientists try to unlock the mysteries of the deadly *HIV virus*.

The problem with these phrases, if there is one, is that they are technically redundant \(*automated-teller machine machine*, *personal-identification number number*, *Universal Product Code code*, *Consumer Price Index Index*, *Strategic Arms Limitation Talks talks*, *anti-ballistic missile missile*, *portable document format format*, and *human-immunodeficiency virus virus*\). Although some editors will insist that these redundancies are unacceptable, they help cue the mind to the precise subject whether the context is speech or writing. In short, the objections smell of pedantry.

A slightly different type of redundancy arises if you define *ATC* as the *air-traffic control system* \(the hyphen is preferable for the phrasal adjective) but later write *ATC system*, as here: "The third factor I mentioned is the air traffic control system \(ATC\). The United States ATC is the finest system \[delete *system*\] in the world, and on a good weather day, with runways and navigation facilities working, things operate smoothly. However, sometimes the *ATC system* \[read *ATC*\] must slow the arrivals at a particular airport." Don Carty, "Why Was My Flight Canceled?," *Am. Way*, 1 May 2001, at 10. Perhaps the better solution in that passage would be to leave *system* out of the definition—e.g.: *The third factor I mentioned is the air-traffic control \(ATC\) system. The United States ATC system is the finest in the world, and in good weather, with runways and navigation facilities working, things operate smoothly. But sometimes the ATC system must slow the arrivals at a particular airport.*

See redundancy.

**C. Initialese.** One of the most irritating types of pedantry in modern writing is the overuse of abbreviations, especially abbreviated names. Originally, to be sure, abbreviations were intended to serve the convenience of the reader by shortening names so that cumbersome phrases would not have to be repeated in their entirety. The purported simplifications actually simplified. But many writers—especially technical writers—seem to have lost sight of this goal: they allow abbreviated terms to proliferate, and their prose quickly becomes a hybrid-English system of hieroglyphs requiring the reader to refer constantly to the original uses of terms to grasp the meaning. This kind of writing might be thought more scholarly than ordinary, straightforward prose. It isn't. Rather, it's tiresome and inconsiderate writing; it betrays the writer's thoughtlessness toward the reader and a puerile fascination with the insubstantial trappings of scholarship.

Three examples suffice to illustrate the malady:

 - "As a comparison to these item-level indices, the factor-level indices IFS and C\_ANR \[*sic*\] were both computed for the maximum likelihood factors. . . . Compression of the factor space tends to decrease both IFS and C\_ANR, while excessive expansion is likely to also decrease the C\_ANR, while the IFS might be expected to be reasonably stable. Thus, four rotation solutions were computed based upon Matthews & Stanton's \(1994\) extraction of 21 factors, the Velicer MAP test indicator of 26 \(PCA\) and 28 \(image\) factors, and Autoscree indicators of 17 and 21 factors for PCA and image respectively. From these solutions, it was hypothesized that a full 31 factor rotation might provide the optimal C\_ANR parameters for the OPQ scales. Further, as a by-product of the use of MLFA, it is possible to compute a test." P. Barrett et al., "An Evaluation of the Psychometric Properties of the Concept 5.2 Occupational Personality Questionnaire," 69 *J. Occupational & Organizational Psychology* 1, 12 \(1996\).

 - "For the initial model, the significant variable TRANS is only significantly correlated with SUBNO. SUBCTY is correlated with NI, with SUBNO, and with FSALEPER. NI, however, is significantly correlated with: \(1\) DOMVIN; \(2\) METH1; and \(3\) METH3. In the reduced model, these intercorrelations with NI are not an area for concern." Karen S. Cravens & Winston T. Shearon Jr., "An Outcome-Based Assessment of International Transfer Pricing Policy," 31 *Int'l J. Accounting* 419, 436 \(1996\) \(parentheticals omitted\).

 - "SLIP, like VALP and ECC, is a defeasible constraint that is obeyed by all the types of head-nexus phrase considered thus far. It guarantees that \(except in SLASH-binding contexts that we turn to in a moment\) the SLASH value of a phrase is the SLASH value of its head-daughter." Ivan A. Sag, "English Relative Clause Constructions," 33 *J. Linguistics* 431, 446 \(1997\).

And so it goes throughout each article. See obscurity.

When naming something new, one sometimes finds the task hopeless: consider the *ALI–ABA CLE Review*, as opposed to calling it the *American Law Institute–American Bar Association Continuing Legal Education Review*. You can't choose either one enthusiastically. Both sponsors must have their due \(in part so that they can have their dues\), and the initialisms might gradually become familiar to readers. But they aren't ideal because they give bad first impressions.

Remember that effective communication takes *two*—the writer and the reader. Arthur Quiller-Couch reminded writers never to forget the audience:

\[T\]he obligation of courtesy rests first with the author, who invites the seance, and commonly charges for it. What follows, but that in speaking or writing we have an obligation to put ourselves into the hearer's or reader's place? It is *his* comfort, *his* convenience, we have to consult. To *express* ourselves is a very small part of the business: very small and unimportant as compared with *impressing* ourselves: the aim of the whole process being to persuade.

Quiller-Couch, *On the Art of Writing* 291–92 \(2d ed. 1943\).

Abbreviations are often conveniences for writers but inconveniences for readers. Whenever that is so, the abbreviations should vanish.

Robert Burchfield warned that the proliferation of initialisms could profoundly affect the language as a whole: "As formations they are often ingenious—for example KWIC \(*K*ey *W*ord *i*n *C*ontext\) and CARE \(*C*ooperative for *A*merican *R*elief *E*verywhere, a federation of U.S. charities\)—but they are barren, in that they cannot generate anything except themselves, and etymologically rootless. Each one that is formed takes the language fractionally away from its Germanic, and ultimately its Indo-European, origins." Robert W. Burchfield, *Unlocking the English Language* 65 \(1989\).

**D. Plurals.** See plurals \(h\).

