# Abstractitis, Essay

Abstractitis . "How vile a thing . . . is the abstract noun\! It wraps a man's thoughts round like cotton wool." Arthur Quiller-Couch, *On the Art of Writing* 109 (2d ed. 1943). *Abstractitis* is Ernest Gowers's term for writing that is so abstract and obtuse (hence abstruse) that the writer does not even know what he or she is trying to say (*FMEU2* at 5). Far be it from the reader, then, to find coherent meaning in such writing.

An example from political science illustrates the affliction:

Rosenau defines linkage as "any recurrent sequence of behavior that originates in one system and is reacted to in another." While there remains little doubt that such linkages exist, it has nevertheless been convenient for scholars of comparative and international politics to disregard or, to use the more contemporary term, to hold constant, factors in the other sphere. Thus, for the student of international politics, the nation functions in the international environment on the basis of the givens of that system, unrestrained by any domestic considerations. Differences existing between national systems are not considered crucial to an understanding of a nation's international behavior. This approach to international politics has been referred to as the "realist" school, and among its leading proponents is Hans J. Morgenthau. From the other perspective, the student of comparative politics feels that the international system is virtually irrelevant for purposes of explaining domestic political events. In both cases, this has led to a rather stultified approach. Situations arose in which the actions of a nation appeared to be "irrational," in that they could not be explained adequately on the basis of the conceptual tools of either of the two approaches.

 It is to these types of problems that the emerging linkage politics approach addresses itself. The purpose of studying linkage politics is to gain a more complete understanding of events by taking account of a large number of variables that have a bearing on the ultimate behavior of a nation, whether this behavior be manifested in the domestic or international spheres. The adoption of such an approach does not imply that all previously unexplained phenomena now come within our grasp. It merely adds a new dimension to those phenomena already accounted for.

Jonathan Wilkenfeld, Introduction, *Conflict Behavior & Linkage Politics* 1 (1973).

This passage doesn't give any examples of the principles it discusses. It combines passive voice with jargon. And it has many of the archetypal abstract words known as zombie nouns—that is, words ending with these suffixes: *-tion*, *-sion*, *-ment*, *-ity*, *-ence*, *-ance*. Writers are well advised to take these longish nouns and turn them back into verbs or participles if possible—that is, write *adopting*, not *the adoption of*, and so on.

The Fowler brothers quote the following sentence—laden with zombie nouns—in *The King's English* (1906): "One of the most important reforms mentioned in the rescript is the unification of the organization of judicial institutions and the guarantee for all the tribunals of the independence necessary for securing to all classes of the community equality before the law" \[42 words\]. Arthur Quiller-Couch's revision eliminates the zombie nouns: "One of the most important reforms is that of the courts, which need to be independent within a uniform structure. In this way only can people be assured that all are equal before the law" \[35 words\]. *On the Art of Writing* 109–10 (2d ed. 1943). But the following revision is even better: "Among the most important reforms is to unify the courts so as to guarantee their independence and the equality of all people before the law" \[25 words\].

George Orwell mocked the trend toward abstractitis by "translating" a passage from Ecclesiastes into "modern" English. The original, in Elizabethan English, read: "I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all." Orwell parodied it this way: "Objective consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion that success or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable element of the unpredictable must invariably be taken into account."

By some accounts, abstractitis leads to far worse things. "If concepts are not clear," wrote Confucius, "words do not fit." And consequences follow: "If words do not fit, the day's work cannot be accomplished, morals and art do not flourish. If morals and art do not flourish, punishments are not just. If punishments are not just, the people do not know where to put hand or foot." Confucius, *Analects* 13.3. When we descend into abstractitis, more than just our language is harmed.

Fred Rodell, a Yale law professor, realist, and semanticist who often criticized lawyers' language, issued his own inimitable warning against abstractitis: "Dealing in words is a dangerous business, and it cannot be too often stressed that what The Law deals in is words. Dealing in long, vague, fuzzy-meaning words is even more dangerous business, and most of the words The Law deals in are long and vague and fuzzy. Making a habit of applying long, vague, fuzzy, general words to specific things and facts is perhaps the most dangerous of all, and The Law does that, too." Fred Rodell, *Woe Unto You, Lawyers\!* 39 (1939; repr. 1980). See obscurity.

One sympathizes with a keen judge who wrestled with the Internal Revenue Code: "The words . . . dance before my eyes in a meaningless procession: cross-reference to cross-reference, exception upon exception—couched in abstract terms that offer no handle to seize hold of—leave in my mind only a confused sense of some vitally important, but successfully concealed, purport, which it is my duty to extract, but which is within my power, if at all, only after the most inordinate expenditure of time." Learned Hand, "Thomas Walter Swan," 57 *Yale L.J.* 167, 169 (1947).

Perhaps the best antidote to this malady—which in some degree afflicts most sophisticated writers—is an active empathy for one's readers. Rigorous thought about concrete meaning, together with careful revision, can eliminate abstractitis.

