# \*ain't

\*ain't. Is this word used orally in most parts of the country by cultivated speakers? In 1961, *W3* said it was, provoking a firestorm of protests from journalists and academics. See Herbert C. Morton, *The Story of Webster's Third* 153–70 \(1994\). *W3*'s assessment was quite a change from that of *W2* \(1934\), which had given it a tag: "*Dial. or Illit.*" The editor of *W3*, Philip Gove, explained the change by conceding that he had no large files of empirical evidence: "Knowledge of some kind of language behavior comes through contact with its observers and is not always documented because there seems to be no reason to collect additional evidence" \(*ibid.* at 262\). If that's the method, then one can confidently say that *W3*'s treatment of *ain't* was flawed in its incompleteness.

In 1962, the year after *W3* was published, an apt cartoon appeared in *The New Yorker*. A man stands in the reception area of G. & C. Merriam Dictionary Division, as the receptionist says to him, "Sorry. Dr. Gove ain't in."

Yes, *\*ain't* is used by cultivated speakers, but usually for either of two reasons: \(1\) to be tongue-in-cheek; and \(2\) to flaunt their reverse snobbery. For most people, it remains the most notorious example of bad usage—a nonword. All in all, the 1934 tag has either remained accurate or been bolstered.

Admittedly, there's a third possibility. The philosopher Hilary Putnam once wrote \(in a famous dictum\): "Cut the pie any way you want, meanings just ain't in the head." Putnam, "The Meaning of Meaning," in *Philosophical Papers, Vol. II: Mind, Language, and Reality* 227 \(1975\). He was drawing special attention to what was then a strikingly unusual "externalist" claim that semantics cannot be a matter of meanings that we hold in our minds. He wanted his statement to surprise. To further this purpose, he used the nonstandard *ain't*. The nonstandard status of the word was crucial for the oomph: borrowing from another dialect enhanced the unusual emphasis being conveyed.

