# antihero

antihero; anti-hero. To denote a protagonist who lacks traditional heroic qualities, the first has been predominant in AmE since the early 1980s; the second is BrE.

As a matter of word formation, *antihero* looks like an antonym of *hero*—which it isn't. Although some people mistake the term as a synonym of *villain*, in fact *antihero* denotes a protagonist who lacks some or many of the admirable attributes of a traditional hero. The archetype goes back to ancient Greek plays. As for the term itself, the Irish playwright Richard Steele used it in 1714, but its modern sense in literary criticism dates from the late 1800s. Essentially, an antihero is a less-than-perfect hero: "An antihero is a protagonist who is as flawed \[as\] or more flawed than most characters; he is someone who disturbs the reader with his weaknesses yet is sympathetically portrayed, and who magnifies the frailties of humanity." Mohan Gopinath et al., *Vignettes Relating to Kathakali and Shakespeare* 57 \(2022\).

Among classic literary protagonists who are antiheroes are Holden Caulfield \(*The Catcher in the Rye*\), Huckleberry Finn \(*Huckleberry Finn*\), Jay Gatsby \(*The Great Gatsby*\), Willy Loman \(*Death of a Salesman*\), J. Alfred Prufrock \("The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"\), and Raskolnikov \(*Crime and Punishment*\). Examples among popular movie and television characters are Carrie Bradshaw \(*Sex and the City*\), Archie Bunker \(*All in the Family*\), Frasier Crane \(*Frasier*\), Jim Hacker \(*Yes, Minister*\), Liz Lemon \(*30 Rock*\), Jim Rockford \(*The Rockford Files*\), Horace Rumpole \(*Rumpole of the Bailey*\), Jerry Seinfeld \(*Seinfeld*\), and Tony Soprano \(*The Sopranos*\).

Given the psychological awareness of modern culture, the old notion of the faultless hero is hardly sustainable. People are flawed, and it's hard to think of any interesting literary character who isn't flawed in some way. So as protagonists go today, antiheroes are more common than a hero who is portrayed without faults, as in a hagiographic biography.

