# Literary Allusion, Essay

Literary Allusion. A brief mention or evocation of a literary work can enrich discourse, bringing in a world of experience that transcends plain statement. Ideally, there should be a good chance of recognition among listeners and readers—no small challenge. With a general audience, the object is to discern what people can be presumed to know. It used to be that every high-school graduate and certainly every college graduate would have a smattering of knowledge about Shakespeare and the Bible. That is far less true today than it was in the early 1900s. No longer is there a widely shared curriculum. Yet with allusion, you must hope that some appreciable number of people in your audience will recognize the deeper meaning.

Hence allusion involves risk. First, there is the obvious risk that some readers or listeners won't know the work being alluded to. For them, the hoped-for benefit won't accrue. Second, there is the more serious risk that those who don't get it will feel befuddled by the strange words or names they're encountering: they'll be conscious that something has been lost on them. Avoiding this latter consequence is the secret to effective allusion. It should work for *everyone* when the context allows readers who don't recognize the allusion to feel included anyway—to understand the meaning without being made to feel ignorant. They won't know what they're missing, and it won't matter. Those who grasp the allusion will be enriched rather than enlightened.

Those aren't the only risks. Another is that people who understand the allusion will consider it inapposite, strained, or otherwise ineffective. They may be exceedingly erudite and discerning, or they may be tediously captious and disputatious. Still another risk, if the allusion is subtle, is that the people who recognize the source won't see that you intended an allusion—but might instead suspect you of lifting someone else's words, perhaps as a mild form of plagiarism.

Mind you, the purpose here isn't to make you reluctant to allude to literature but rather sensitive to the issues that can arise.

Writers often allude to ancient myths \(labors of Hercules, Pandora's box, Sisyphean task\), fables \(crying wolf, goose that laid the golden egg, wolf in sheep's clothing\), and the Bible \(brother's keeper, eye for an eye, thou shalt not . . . \). Allusions often involve paraphrases to suit the context of the statement. A sentence will typically be molded to the current discussion, as with these biblical quotations: it's a *house divided against itself* \(Mark 3:25\); Forgive the Xs—*they know not what they do* \(Luke 23:24\); X doesn't *suffer fools gladly* \(II Corinthians 11:19\).

Allusion inhabits a much less populated region than the cliché, which is so overused as to be largely ineffective. When encountering a cliché, knowledgeable readers are likely to wince at its predictability; when encountering an allusion, they are more likely to smile at its surprising fitness.

Being indirect, allusion is more subtle than an explicit reference. That subtlety is itself the source of readers' pleasure. \(Citations rarely inspire joy.\) The best allusions please those who recognize the source while not bothering others. Again, that's the test for effective allusions. Do the words work without significant risk of incomprehension?

Some number of those in the audience must be in the know. For example, you might wish to echo a barb of Mark Twain's by writing, "As Twain said of Cooper, ‘He saw nearly all things as through a glass eye, darkly.' " This allusion to Mark Twain's famous essay "Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offenses" \(1895\) assumes that your audience will recognize the authors named. But names of characters or authors, as opposed to mere snippets of language, may well create unclarity in the minds of those who don't recognize them. You could remedy this by giving full names and citations. But then you'd no longer be making an allusion: it would be a full-on reference. See **allude \(a\)**.

Instead, you could omit the attribution entirely to avoid confusing the uninitiated. After all, the operative allusion—Twain's—is to the Bible \("For now we see through a glass, darkly" \[I Corinthians 13:12\]\). That's where the humor is—and this allusion requires no understanding of Twain or Cooper to be delightful. There's no hindrance to understanding here for a reader who doesn't recognize the phrase *through a glass, darkly*, much less its source.

But if you were to echo Twain without mentioning him—as by saying that someone being discussed "sees through a glass eye, darkly"—you might give rise to the potential pitfall of suspected plagiarism. A reader who recognizes Twain's memorable twist on I Corinthians might, upon encountering it unattributed, falsely \(and rather uncharitably\) assume that you're trying to pass off his wit as your own. In fact, in this hypothetical situation, you were alluding to the Twain–Cooper dustup, but your reader doesn't see this, suspecting instead that you were just taking someone else's witticism as if you had created it. This risk occurs principally when the allusion echoes someone else's words, unaltered and unattributed—particularly when the source is less commonly known. No one would mistake Twain's own witticism for plagiarism: in altering an oft-quoted passage from a source as common as the Bible, Twain created an in-joke between himself and his audience.

So there's a paradox in effective allusion. If you briefly \(perhaps laconically\) mention a name as a source, that attention-getter may create confusion and spoil the effect; if you don't mention a name as a source, you may create the false impression that you're trying to pass off someone else's words as your own.

And then there's the possibility that your allusion is recognized but proves less than scintillating. Let's say you're at the beach, and you've gotten a little sunburned. As you retreat into the shade, you remark to your friend, "I am too much in the sun." In a way, it's pleasing that someone with a lively interest in literature sees the verbal aptness of the line to the current situation. But the allusion is merely verbal, not dramatic. Neither the situation nor the quotation has much if anything to do with the scene in the play \(1.2.67\), when a morose Hamlet speaks punningly \(*sun*/*son*\) to Claudius and Gertrude \(his mother\).

By contrast, consider an instance in which there's a dramatic as well as a verbal alignment. If two people are recalling a late friend—a prankster, perhaps—one might hold a photograph of the friend and utter, "Alas, poor X\!" The word *alas* followed by *poor* evokes the graveyard scene \(5.1.182\) in which Hamlet says, "Alas, poor Yorick\!" while holding the skull of the king's late jester. Here the mood-inducing allusion is more effective because the allusion is to the dramatic situation as much as to the two words that elicit the situation in listeners' minds. But of course only some people could carry this off: it might come across as stuffy and false pretense, or perhaps even mockery.

If an inapt allusion may fail to impress a knowledgeable audience, a truly bungled one can be an embarrassment. Johnnie Cochran, the famous defense lawyer in the O.J. Simpson murder trial, referred to Robert Louis Stevenson's *Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde* \(1886\), but his memory of the plot failed him: "Eleanor Knowles Dugan is the first of several to point out that Johnnie Cochran got himself all upscrewed when he said, ‘The prosecution is trying to portray \[Mark\] Fuhrman as Mr. Hyde but he's really Dr. Jekyll.' Jekyll was the good guy, Johnnie." Herb Caen, "Is It Friday Yet?," *S.F. Chron.*, 15 Sept. 1995, at A20. For allusion to work, both the audience and the speaker or writer must know the source material. Show inadequate knowledge before a well-informed audience, and you may look foolish.

Given that audience knowledge is a prerequisite, we should consider what we can now count on people to have read. We can hardly expect all educated people within a given culture to have read specific works of literature. The closest perhaps is the *Harry Potter* series of books. For fans of the series, passing mentions of Dumbledore, dementors, or Diagon Alley might be gratifying indeed. But to someone—perhaps even a litterateur—unfamiliar with Rowling's wizard world, such mentions are likely to mystify. A diligent reader who investigates these strange terms may well, upon discovering their source, become irritated.

Yet many scholar-enthusiasts remain undeterred. In the field of law, for example, *Potter* devotees have published articles with titles such as *Hogwarts Torts*, *Infringicus Maximus\!*, and *Regulatory Horcruxes*. Judges do it in their opinions, too. Writing in an insurance case, one judge referred to "the no-fault insurance equivalent of ‘He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named,' " with a one-word footnote: Voldemort. Believe it or not, a few judges refer to that character, in a variety of contexts, with some frequency.

These writers, and others like them, may mean to flatter their readers. And many are doubtless flattered. But with other readers, the result is probably confusion or annoyance. They might demand more matter with less art. They might want to cry, "Angels and ministers of grace defend us\!" They might not be ready for those types of literary allusions. And as we know, the readiness is all.

