# Loanwords

Loanwords .

**A. Generally.** Although all languages borrow words from elsewhere, the English vocabulary is a particularly vast and varied assortment of words from different languages. English may well have gained much of its capacious receptivity to borrowed terms from the clash of cultures following the Norman Conquest of 1066, which resulted in a blending into its Germanic roots of vast numbers of Romance words. The French influence is prominent, for example, in the writing of Chaucer \(ca. 1300\). Then, with the advent of printing in England in the late 1400s, writers often referred to the "rude and barbarous" tongue in which they worked as being inadequate to their task. Many of them avidly devised new words on Latin and Greek roots. But the great majority of these never became "core words"; rather, they stayed at the periphery of the language.

The core/periphery dichotomy is important. In recent years, linguists have quantified the frequency of occurrence among the most common words, with strata graded in thousands all the way up to 10,000 \(and beyond\). It has long been known that the definite article *the* is by far the most commonly used word in the language. *I* and *you* are close seconds in speech, though in writing they are significantly less frequent. What is fascinating, though, is to quantify the percentages of words whose origin is English, French, Latin, Norse, or "other." Although 83% of the 1,000 most frequently used words in English derive from Anglo-Saxon \(Old English\), that number drops precipitously to 34% when we look at the top 2,000 words. From 1,000 to 2,000, the French element swells from 11% to 46%, and the Latin from 2% to 11%. \(See Donka Minkowa & Robert Stockwell, "English Words," in *The Handbook of English Linguistics* 461, 466 \[Bas Aarts & April McMahon eds., 2006\].\)

Among the 10,000 words most frequently used in English, the Anglo-Saxon element accounts for 25%, the French element 42%, and the Latin element 18%. Norse comes in at 1%, and "other" at 14%. By any reckoning, the English vocabulary is an extraordinary blend of indigenous words and loanwords.

And notice that in the figures just cited, the French and Latin elements combined is more than double that of the Anglo-Saxon. It comes as no surprise that some 65% of Shakespeare's vocabulary of about 20,000 words is of French and Latin derivation \(including Greek through Latin\). Admittedly, even the question of calculating Shakespeare's vocabulary is not without controversy—because of the differing ways of dealing with variations and inflections of a given word. The point, however, remains.

When it comes to English words, the most basic ones relating to everyday life derive from Anglo-Saxon \(*brother*, *father*, *floor*, *food*, *go*, *mother*, *rain*, *sister*, *sleep*, etc.\). More abstract notions are represented in words of foreign origin, especially French and Latin \(*autonomy*, *capitalism*, *cognition*, *invention*, *investigate*, *nutrition*, *precipitation*, *reverberate*, *tolerance*, etc.\). Often the register is indicated by etymological origin. We tend to say *he died poor*, not *he expired in indigent circumstances*. See etymology \(b\).

To assess the effect of loanwords on the language, consider a famous example from English literature. In the following passage from *Hamlet* \(1603\), all the italicized words qualify as loanwords because they wouldn't be found in Anglo-Saxon texts. Note the tonal richness of the passage:

I will tell you why, so shall my *anticipation prevent* your *discovery*, and your *secrecy* to the King and Queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all *custom* of *exercises*; and indeed it goes so heavily with my *disposition*, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a *sterile promontory*; this most *excellent* *canopy*, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging *firmament*, this *majestical* roof *fretted* with golden fire, why, it *appeareth* nothing to me but a foul and *pestilent congregation* of *vapours*. What a *piece* of work is a man, how *noble* in *reason*, how *infinite* in *faculties*, in *form* how *moving*, how *express* and *admirable* in *action*, how like an *angel* in *apprehension*, how like a god\! the *beauty* of the world; the *paragon* of *animals*; and yet to me what is this *quintessence* of dust? \(2.2.293–308.\)

The intermingling of native with borrowed words lends the passage a rhythmical and vibrant quality that would be lacking in a completely Anglo-Saxon \(hence mostly monosyllabic\) rendition, if that were even possible. And we see the characteristic strengths of the various planes of diction. There is a series of metaphorical progressions, concrete to abstract, in which the Anglo-Saxon word first stated is metamorphosed into one or more cerebral Latinisms used disparagingly. Hence *earth* \(pure, direct English\) is transformed into the figurative and abstract *sterile promontory*; *the air* becomes *a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours*; and *man* becomes *the paragon of animals; . . . this quintessence of dust*. The final word, of course, is Anglo-Saxon: see sentence ends.

Another point, though, is worth making: the foreign element often brings with it a rich assortment of evocative meanings. The word *quintessence* provides an excellent example. Taken from the Latin *quinta essential* \(lit., "fifth essence"\), it derives from the notion in ancient and medieval philosophy that a fifth element, transcending the four earthly elements \(earth, water, fire, and air\), existed and was the substance of heavenly bodies. Hence *quintessence* came to denote the highest or purest form of any existing thing. And it has never shed its philosophical suggestiveness. In the phrase *quintessence of dust*, Shakespeare demonstrates a sensitivity to the texture of the words both foreign and native: *quintessence*, a lush and erudite word, is introduced only be yoked with the terse Anglo-Saxon *dust*. The juxtaposition creates power. The effect is even enhanced in the sound of the phrase: the sibilance of *quintessence* lingers for a moment, while the sibilant in *dust* is abruptly cut off by the final consonant.

In short, the French and Latin elements in English are no less important than the Anglo-Saxon. If the native part makes up the skeleton of the language, the foreign accounts for most of the flesh. Effective writers are willing to use every form of verbal wealth at their disposal.

Adding to the layers of linguistic nuance is the historical fact that many foreign words were essentially borrowed twice—in slightly different forms known as doublets. A given French word was often borrowed first in the 1300s, and a Latinate form of the same word might be borrowed in the 1500s and 1600s. Among doublets of this kind are *count/compute*, *debt/debit*, *frail/fragile*, and *ray/radius*.

And what of the "other" borrowings? They are cumulatively substantial even if the individual percentages are nothing like those of French and Latin. Some examples: indigenous African languages \(*chimpanzee*, *juju*, *safari*, *zombie*\), Afrikaans \(*apartheid*, *trek*\), indigenous North American languages \(*moose*, *muckety-muck*, *raccoon*\), indigenous South American languages \(*jaguar*, *tapir*\), Arabic \(*assassin*, *syrup*, *zero*\), indigenous Australian languages \(*boomerang*, *kangaroo*\), Chinese \(*feng-shui*, *gung-ho*, *kowtow*, *tea*\), Dutch \(*coleslaw*, *tattoo* \[military sense\]\), Gaelic \(*banshee*, *galore*, *whisky*\), German \(*lager*, *schadenfreude*, *zeitgeist*\), Greek \(*cosmos*, *idiosyncrasy*, *plutocracy*\), Hebrew \(*amen*, *hallelujah*, *sabbatical*\), Hindi \(*bungalow*, *pundit*, *shampoo*\), Hungarian \(*goulash*, *paprika*\), Inuit \(*igloo*, *kayak*\), Italian \(*espresso*, *opera*, *piano*, *tempo*\), Japanese \(*anime*, *bonsai*, *futon*, *napa*\), Korean \(*kimchi*, *taekwondo*\), Malay \(*amok*, \[*tea*\] *caddy*, *orangutan*\), Persian \(*bazaar*, *caravan*, *cushy*\), Polish \(*baba cake*, *mazurka*\), Polynesian languages \(*kiwi*, *luau*, *tattoo* \[skin sense\], *ukulele*\), Russian \(*czar*, *intelligentsia*, *vodka*\), Spanish \(*honcho*, *rodeo*, *siesta*\), Swedish \(*moped*, *smorgasbord*\), Tagalog \(*boondocks*\), Thai \(*bong*, *pad thai*\), and Vietnamese \(*banh mi*, *pho*\)—among others. This great diversity has without question been a *boon* \(early Scandinavian\) to the language.

In this book, many more peripheral than core terms are treated—words of etymologically diverse origins, as opposed to those just tracing back to Anglo-Saxon. That's because English usage is often of greatest interest to writers and editors who grapple with terminological challenges outside even the very most frequently used terms. \(For a relevant discussion on an allied point, see the entry on sesquipedality.\) In its successive editions, this book has increasingly dealt not just with the most common usage issues, but also with issues that arise only occasionally among specialists. Unsurprisingly, you'll find that the term *loanword* appears with some frequency: it's surely among the top 10,000 words represented in the corpus of words contained in this book, even if it isn't in the top 10,000 words used generally. Voila.

The brief account here given skims the surface of a large field of linguistic investigation. For more, see—for starters—Philip Durkin, *Borrowed Words: A History of Loanwords in English* \(2014\); D. Gary Miller, *External Influences on English from Its Beginnings to the Renaissance* \(2012\); Paivi Pahta, Janne Skaffari & Laura Wright, *Multilingual Practices in Language History: English and Beyond* \(2017\); Francis Katamba, *English Words: Structure, History, Usage* \(2015\); Martin Haspelmath & Uri Tadmor, *Loanwords in the World's Languages: A Comparative Handbook* \(2009\).

**B. Garner's Law of Loanwords.** The more arcane or technical a loanword, the more likely it is to retain a foreign plural, diacritical marks, and italics; the more common it becomes, the more likely it is to lose them. Corollary: if the loanword becomes widely used, it typically loses italics first, diacritical marks second, and a foreign plural last.

**C. Plurals of Loanwords.** See plurals \(b\).

